Copyright	©	2018	by	Reid	Hoffman	and	Chris	Yeh
All	rights	reserved.
Published	in	the	United	States	by	Currency,	an	imprint	of	the	Crown	Publishing	Group,	a	division	of
Penguin	Random	House	LLC,	New	York.
currencybooks.com
CURRENCY	and	its	colophon	are	trademarks	of	Penguin	Random	House	LLC.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Names:	Hoffman,	Reid,	author.	|	Yeh,	Chris,	author.
Title:	Blitzscaling	:	the	lightning-fast	path	to	creating	massively	valuable	businesses	/	by	Reid	Hoffman	and
Chris	Yeh.
Description:	First	edition.	|	New	York	:	Currency,	[2018]	|	Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
Identifiers:	LCCN	2017058413	|	ISBN	9781524761417
Subjects:	LCSH:	New	business	enterprises.	|	Small	business—Growth.	|	Entrepreneurship.
Classification:	LCC	HD62.5.H624	2018	|	DDC	658.4/063—dc23	LC	record	available	at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2017058413
ISBN 9781524761417
Ebook	ISBN 9781524761424
Cover	design	by	Josh	Smith
v5.3.2
ep
Contents
Cover
Title	Page
Copyright
Foreword	by	Bill	Gates
Introduction
Part	I:	What	Is	Blitzscaling?
Software	Is	Eating	(and	Saving)	the	World
The	Types	of	Scaling
The	Three	Basics	of	Blitzscaling
The	Five	Stages	of	Blitzscaling
The	Three	Key	Techniques	of	Blitzscaling
Part	II:	Business	Model	Innovation
Designing	to	Maximize	Growth:	The	Four	Growth	Factors
Designing	to	Maximize	Growth:	The	Two	Growth	Limiters
Proven	Business	Model	Patterns
The	Underlying	Principles	of	Business	Model	Innovation
Analyzing	a	Few	Billion-Dollar	Business	Models
Part	III:	Strategy	Innovation
When	Should	I	Start	to	Blitzscale?
When	Should	I	Stop	Blitzscaling?
Can	I	Choose	Not	to	Blitzscale?
Blitzscaling	Is	Iterative
How	Blitzscaling	Strategy	Changes	in	Each	Stage
How	the	Role	of	the	Founder	Changes	in	Each	Stage
Part	IV:	Management	Innovation
Eight	Key	Transitions
Nine	Counterintuitive	Rules	of	Blitzscaling
The	Never-ending	Need	for	Change
Part	V:	The	Broader	Landscape	of	Blitzscaling
Blitzscaling	Beyond	High	Tech
Blitzscaling	Within	a	Larger	Organization
Blitzscaling	Beyond	Business
Blitzscaling	in	Greater	Silicon	Valley
Other	Blitzscaling	Regions	to	Watch
China:	The	Land	of	Blitzscaling
Defending	Against	Blitzscaling
Part	VI:	Responsible	Blitzscaling
Blitzscaling	in	Society
Framework	for	Responsible	Blitzscaling
The	Response	Spectrum
Balancing	Responsibility	and	Velocity	as	the	Organization	Grows
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
Appendix	A:	Disclosures
Appendix	B:	The	Blitzscalers
Appendix	C:	CS183C	Essays
FOREWORD	BY	BILL	GATES
I’ve	known	Reid	Hoffman	for	years.	Our	friendship	started	on	my	visits	to
Silicon	Valley	to	meet	with	Greylock	Partners,	the	venture	capital	firm	where
Reid	is	a	partner,	so	I	could	learn	about	the	companies	they	were	investing	in.	I
was	always	impressed	by	his	sharp	mind	and	brilliant	business	sense.	Reid	is
famous	for	hosting	long	dinners	where	the	conversation	runs	late	into	the	night,
and	we’ve	spent	many	meals	breaking	down	the	technology	industry,	analyzing
the	promise	of	artificial	intelligence,	and	more.	When	Microsoft	CEO	Satya
Nadella	started	talking	about	acquiring	LinkedIn,	I	knew	it	would	be	an	amazing
fit.
Of	all	the	things	I’ve	discussed	with	Reid,	the	most	thought-provoking	might
be	blitzscaling.	It	is	an	idea	that	applies	to	many	different	industries,	as	he	and
Chris	 explain	 in	 the	 last	 section	 of	 this	 book.	 But	 prioritizing	 speed	 over
efficiency—even	in	the	face	of	uncertainty—is	especially	important	when	your
business	model	depends	on	having	lots	of	members	and	getting	feedback	from
them.	If	you	get	in	early	and	start	getting	that	feedback	and	your	competitors
don’t,	then	you’re	on	the	path	to	success.	In	any	business	where	scale	really
matters,	getting	in	early	and	doing	it	fast	can	make	the	difference.
This	is	especially	true	for	two-sided	business	models,	where	you	have	two
user	groups	that	create	positive	network	effects	for	each	other.	For	example,
LinkedIn	wants	to	attract	people	who	are	looking	for	work	as	well	as	employers
who	want	to	hire	them.	Airbnb	wants	guests	looking	for	a	place	to	stay	as	well	as
hosts	with	space	to	rent.	Uber	wants	to	attract	drivers	as	well	as	riders.
And	 a	 software	 company	 with	 an	 operating	 system	 to	 sell	 wants	 app
developers	as	well	as	end	users.	Microsoft	definitely	went	through	a	blitzscaling
phase	(although	we	didn’t	call	it	that	at	the	time).	We	got	on	the	learning	curve
early	and	were	able	to	build	a	reputation	as	a	serious	company.	We	had	an
extreme	culture	of	working	hard	and	getting	things	done	fast.
The	ideas	behind	blitzscaling	aren’t	just	for	startups	and	scale-ups.	They’re
important	for	big,	established	companies	too.	The	window	for	action	can	be	tiny
and	 it	 can	 close	 quickly.	 Even	 a	 few	 months	 of	 hesitation	 can	 mean	 the
difference	between	leading	and	chasing.
Reid	and	Chris’s	ideas	are	more	practical	than	ever,	because	it	is	now	possible
to	get	big	fast	in	a	way	that	simply	wasn’t	feasible	a	few	decades	ago.	There	is	a
rich	ecosystem	of	service	providers	and	outsourcing	companies	to	support	rapid
growth.	Many	companies	have	gone	through	their	own	big	growth	spurts,	so
there	are	lots	of	examples	to	learn	from.	User	feedback	comes	in	a	constant
stream	of	data.	Product	cycles	have	dropped	from	yearly	to	weekly	or	daily.	And
good	reviews	can	spread	in	an	instant	online,	so	a	strong	product	can	quickly
attract	a	big	audience.
In	other	words,	the	case	studies	you’re	about	to	explore	and	the	tools	you’re
about	to	gain	have	never	been	more	relevant.	This	is	an	ideal	moment	to	be
reading	this	book.	I’m	glad	Reid	and	Chris	are	sharing	their	insights.
Introduction
2011:	SAN	FRANCISCO,	AIRBNB	HEADQUARTERS
“They’re	probably	going	to	kill	you.”
The	year	was	2011,	and	in	the	offices	of	Airbnb,	then	a	scrappy	little	forty-
person	start-up,	its	cofounder	and	CEO	Brian	Chesky	had	just	received	some
very	bad	news.
Brian	pondered	the	implications	of	the	ominous	prediction	he’d	just	heard
from	Andrew	Mason,	the	cofounder	and	CEO	of	Groupon.	He	didn’t	like	it.
Brian	and	his	cofounders,	Joe	Gebbia	and	Nathan	Blecharcyzk,	had	already
fought	their	way	through	plenty	of	obstacles	to	build	Airbnb,	a	website	that
makes	it	easy	for	people	to	rent	out	their	rooms	or	homes	for	the	night.	In	the
beginning,	every	investor	the	founders	approached	had	turned	them	down	or,
worse,	ignored	them.	The	company	was	on	the	upswing	now,	but	the	painful
early	days	were	still	fresh	in	their	minds,	and	they	weren’t	looking	for	another
battle.
When	the	Airbnb	founders	first	met,	Paul	Graham,	the	highly	regarded	founder
of	the	start-up	accelerator	Y	Combinator	(YC),	told	them	flat	out	that	their	idea
was	terrible.	“People	are	actually	doing	this?!”	he	incredulously	asked.	When
Brian	told	him	yes,	people	were,	in	fact,	renting	out	their	living	spaces	for	a
night,	Graham’s	response	was	“What’s	wrong	with	them?”
Still,	Graham	had	accepted	the	Airbnb	guys	into	the	three-month-long	YC
program.	Not	because	he	was	inspired	by	their	Airbnb	business,	but	because	he
was	impressed	by	the	hustle	of	the	founders.	He	loved	the	(now	famous)	story
about	how	Chesky	and	his	cofounders	managed	to	pay	the	bills	while	trying	to
get	Airbnb	off	the	ground.	It	was	2008,	a	US	presidential	election	year,	so	they
created	 and	 sold	 special-edition	 cereals	 called	 “Obama	 O’s”	 and	 “Cap’n
McCains”—a	sugary	parody	of	(or	tribute	to,	depending	on	how	you	look	at	it)
that	 year’s	 candidates	 Barack	 Obama	 and	 John	 McCain.	 The	 creativity	 and
persistence	displayed	by	the	Airbnb	founders	as	“cereal	entrepreneurs”	got	them
in	the	door	at	YC;	once	in	the	program,	they	refined	their	business	and	were	able
to	persuade	two	leading	venture	capital	firms,	Sequoia	Capital	and	Greylock
Partners	(where	I	am	a	general	partner),	to	invest.
Now,	nearly	four	years	later,	it	seemed	like	all	the	hard	work	was	finally
starting	to	pay	off.	Having	celebrated	its	millionth	booking,	Airbnb	had	plenty	of
working	capital,	and	it	was	clear	that	the	concept	was	valuable.
But	 when	 you’re	 successful,	 you	 attract	 competition.	 And	 sometimes	 that
competition	represents	a	deadly	threat.
In	 Airbnb’s	 case,	 that	 threat	 was	 three	 brothers	 from	 Cologne,	 Germany:
Oliver,	 Marc,	 and	 Alexander	 Samwer.	 They	 had	 become	 billionaires	 by
analyzing	successful	US	companies,	rapidly	creating	copycats	in	Europe,	and,	in
many	 cases,	 selling	 those	 “cloned”	 companies	 to	 their	 original	 American
inspirations.	In	other	cases,	the	Samwers	actually	held	on	to	and	built	out	their
clones;	Zalando,	the	“Zappos	of	Europe,”	had	over	ten	thousand	employees	and
was	worth	more	than	$10	billion	in	2017.
Their	first	success	was	Alando,	an	eBay	knockoff	that	they	were	able	to	sell	to
eBay	for	$43	million,	just	one	hundred	days	after	launching	it.	The	Samwer
brothers	then	invested	in	the	German	versions	of	YouTube	(MyVideo),	Twitter
(Frazr),	 and	 Facebook	 (StudiVZ)	 before	 founding	 their	 own	 start-up	 studio,
Rocket	Internet.
In	early	2011,	Brian	and	his	team	started	noticing	that	Airbnb	users	were
being	spammed	by	a	new	company	named	Wimdu.	Wimdu	had	apparently	just
received	$90	million—the	largest	investment	in	a	European	start-up	to	date—
from	none	other	than	Rocket	Internet	and	Kinnevik,	a	major	Swedish	investment
company	that	had	partnered	with	the	Samwer	brothers.
The	problem?	Wimdu’s	business	model	and	website	looked	like	a	knockoff	of
Airbnb’s.
Wimdu	was	founded	in	March	2011,	and,	within	weeks,	the	Berlin-based
company	had	hired	a	staggering	four	hundred	employees	and	opened	twenty
offices	across	Europe.	Meanwhile,	the	original,	but	much	smaller,	Airbnb	had
raised	only	$7	million,	had	just	forty	employees,	and	operated	out	of	a	single
office	in	San	Francisco.	As	a	first-time	CEO,	Brian	wasn’t	even	sure	what	was
involved	in	opening	a	second	office,	let	alone	dozens	more	on	another	continent.
Brian	 also	 knew	 that	 if	 Wimdu	 was	 able	 to	 capture	 and	 dominate	 the
European	market,	Airbnb	might	not	survive.	“If	you’re	a	travel	site	and	you
don’t	 cover	 Europe,	 you’re	 dead,”	 he	 told	 us	 in	 2015,	 when	 he	 visited	 the
Technology-Enabled	Blitzscaling	class	we	taught	at	Stanford	University.
The	Samwer	brothers	had	named	their	price:	Airbnb	could	have	Wimdu	in
exchange	for	a	25-percent	stake	in	Airbnb.	Now	Brian	faced	a	difficult	decision,
with	painful	consequences	regardless	of	what	option	he	chose.
In	response,	Brian	turned	to	one	of	his	favorite	decision-making	techniques:
reaching	out	to	the	world’s	leading	experts.	His	first	call	was	to	the	CEO	of
Groupon	at	the	time,	Andrew	Mason.	The	leading	daily	deals	company	had	had
a	similar	experience	the	previous	year:	In	December	2009,	the	Samwer	brothers
had	launched	CityDeal,	their	Groupon	lookalike.	Six	months	later,	Groupon	paid
a	nine-figure	price,	roughly	10	percent	of	its	valuation	at	that	point,	to	acquire
this	competitor.
Here	was	the	question	weighing	heavily	on	Brian	and	his	team:	Should	Airbnb
follow	 Groupon’s	 strategy	 and	 just	 buy	 the	 knockoff	 company?	 Brian’s	 gut
instinct	was	to	say	no.	Integrating	Wimdu’s	finance-centric	and	metric-driven
team	could	harm	Airbnb’s	design-driven	culture.	He	was	also	reluctant	to	reward
what	he	saw	as	a	legal	extortion	racket	rather	than	a	sincere	attempt	to	create
value	in	the	market.
Yet	Brian	felt	he	had	an	obligation	to	consider	the	offer.	Mason	had	told	him
that	despite	the	many	problems	the	CityDeal	acquisition	had	brought,	it	had	also
accelerated	 Groupon’s	 progress	 into	 the	 European	 market,	 which	 ended	 up
accounting	for	nearly	30	percent	of	its	global	sales.	It	could	easily	be	argued	that
giving	up	10	percent	of	Groupon	for	CityDeal	was	actually	a	good	deal.	But
perhaps	emboldened	by	their	successful	CityDeal	gambit,	the	Samwers	were
asking	for	a	far	larger	share	of	Airbnb—a	full	25	percent.
On	the	other	hand,	Airbnb	could	reject	the	offer	and	instead	take	on	the
aggressive	Samwer	brothers	in	a	head-to-head	competition.	But	Wimdu	had	the
home-turf	advantage,	not	to	mention	ten	times	the	number	of	employees	and
more	than	ten	times	the	amount	of	invested	capital.	Competing	against	them
would	be	one	hell	of	an	uphill	battle.
Tired	of	the	fund-raising	grind,	especially	its	emotional	toll,	Brian	wondered
whether	he	had	it	in	him	to	take	on	this	new	and	likely	bruising	fight.	But	he	and
his	 team	 had	 spent	 eighteen	 seemingly	 fruitless	 months	 working	 on	 Airbnb
before	entering	Y	Combinator,	racking	up	tens	of	thousands	of	dollars	in	credit
card	debt.	After	all	the	blood,	sweat,	and	tears,	were	they	really	willing	to	give
up	a	quarter	of	their	company?
Ultimately,	Brian	decided	not	to	buy	Wimdu,	swayed	in	part	by	the	arguments
of	his	key	advisers.	Facebook	founder	Mark	Zuckerberg	counseled	him	to	fight.
“Don’t	buy	them,”	he	said.	“The	best	product	will	win.”
YC’s	 Paul	 Graham	 gave	 similar	 feedback.	 “They’re	 mercenaries.	 You’re
missionaries,”	he	told	Brian.	“They’re	like	people	raising	a	baby	they	don’t
actually	want.”
When	Brian	reached	out	to	me	for	my	advice	on	the	situation,	I	too	advised
him	not	to	buy	Wimdu.	The	key	issue	wasn’t	the	price	and	dilution,	but	the	way
a	merger	could	pose	impediments	to	speed	and	success.	“Buying	[Wimdu]	adds
a	substantial	amount	of	integration	risk,	which	tripped	up	Groupon	after	buying
CityDeal,”	I	told	him.	“Merging	company	cultures	and	company	management
could	create	potentially	fatal	risks,	especially	if	it	slows	us	down.	With	Airbnb,
we	have	a	business	that	is	already	benefiting	from	network	effects.	We	can	win.”
I	stand	by	that	advice	today.
In	 the	 end,	 Airbnb’s	 founders	 realized	 that	 they	 wanted	 to	 take	 on	 the
Samwers—and	they	wanted	to	win.	But	how?
The	 key	 was	 an	 aggressive,	 all-out	 program	 of	 growth	 that	 we	 call
blitzscaling.	Blitzscaling	drives	“lightning”	growth	by	prioritizing	speed	over
efficiency,	even	in	an	environment	of	uncertainty.	It’s	a	set	of	specific	strategies
and	tactics	that	allowed	Airbnb	to	beat	the	Samwer	brothers	at	their	own	game.
Just	 a	 few	 months	 later,	 determined	 to	 acquire	 the	 resources	 needed	 to
outscale	the	Samwers,	Brian	raised	$112	million	in	additional	venture	capital.
Airbnb	then	embarked	on	an	aggressive	international	expansion	plan,	including
the	acquisition	of	Accoleo,	a	smaller	and	more	affordable	German	Airbnb	clone,
that	allowed	Airbnb	to	compete	directly	with	Wimdu	in	its	home	market.	By	the
spring	of	2012,	Airbnb	had	opened	nine	international	offices,	setting	up	shop	in
London,	Hamburg,	Berlin,	Paris,	Milan,	Barcelona,	Copenhagen,	Moscow,	and
São	Paulo.	Bookings	had	grown	ten	times	since	that	previous	February,	and	in
June	2012	Airbnb	announced	its	ten	millionth	booking.
“The	 Samwers	 gave	 us	 a	 gift,”	 Brian	 admitted	 many	 years	 later	 in	 our
Blitzscaling	class.	“They	forced	us	to	scale	faster	than	we	ever	would	have.”	By
choosing	to	grow	at	a	breakneck	pace,	Airbnb	had	achieved	a	dominant	position
in	its	market.	Despite	the	initial	advantages	that	the	Berlin-based	Wimdu	had	in
human	 resources,	 financial	 capital,	 and	 European	 market	 knowledge,	 the
techniques	that	Brian	and	his	cofounders	implemented	allowed	Airbnb	to	meet
and	ultimately	defeat	its	challenger.
2010:	SHENZHEN,	CHINA,	TENCENT	HEADQUARTERS
About	a	year	before	Airbnb	embarked	on	its	blitzscaling	journey,	in	a	different
CEO’s	office	on	the	other	side	of	the	world,	the	message	that	would	change
everything	arrived	in	the	middle	of	the	night.
It	was	the	fall	of	2010,	and	Pony	Ma	(Chinese	name:	Ma	Huateng)	was	trying
to	 figure	 out	 what	 came	 next	 for	 Tencent,	 the	 company	 he	 had	 run	 since
founding	it	in	1998	with	four	classmates	from	Shenzhen	University.	Thanks	to
its	 core	 product,	 the	 QQ	 instant	 messaging	 service,	 which	 had	 650	 million
monthly	active	users,	Tencent	had	become	one	of	China’s	most	valuable	Internet
companies	with	revenues	of	nearly	$2	billion,	a	market	capitalization	of	over
$33	billion,	and	more	than	ten	thousand	employees.	However,	QQ	was	now	a
mature	desktop	product	based	on	late-1990s	technology,	and	its	user	base	had
stopped	 growing.	 Its	 American	 counterpart,	 AOL	 Instant	 Messenger,	 was
already	in	a	swift	decline.
Ma	was	convinced	that	Tencent	had	to	develop	a	new	breakthrough	product
for	the	emerging	smartphone	platform—or	else.	“Internet	companies	that	can
react	will	survive,”	he	said,	“and	those	who	can’t	will	die.”
The	message	Pony	Ma	read	that	night	was	from	one	of	Tencent’s	employees,
Allen	Zhang	(Chinese	name:	Zhang	Xiaolong),	a	fellow	entrepreneur	whose
company,	Foxmail,	Tencent	had	acquired	five	years	earlier.	Zhang	now	ran	the
company’s	 Guangzhou	 R&D	 division,	 which	 was	 a	 two-hour	 drive	 from
Tencent’s	Shenzhen	headquarters.	He	had	been	monitoring	the	rapid	growth	of	a
new	social	messaging	product	called	Kik,	which	was	especially	popular	among
young	 people.	 He	 decided	 that	 Tencent	 needed	 to	 create	 its	 own	 social
messenger	for	smartphones—and	quickly.
Zhang’s	proposal	represented	not	only	a	huge	opportunity	but	also	a	huge	risk,
with	 equally	 huge	 uncertainty	 about	 the	 outcome.	 While	 a	 new	 messenger
service	might	appeal	to	young	consumers,	it	was	probably	going	to	cannibalize
QQ,	which	was,	after	all,	Tencent’s	core	business.	Furthermore,	Tencent	had
partnered	with	leading	mobile	carriers	like	China	Mobile	to	receive	40	percent	of
the	SMS	charges	that	QQ	users	racked	up	when	they	sent	messages	to	mobile
phones.	A	new	service	could	hurt	Tencent’s	financial	bottom	line	and	at	the
same	time	risk	its	relationships	with	some	of	China’s	most	powerful	companies.
It	 was	 the	 sort	 of	 decision	 that	 publicly	 traded,	 ten-thousand-person
companies	typically	refer	to	a	committee	for	further	study.	But	Ma	wasn’t	a
typical	corporate	executive.	That	very	night,	he	gave	Zhang	the	go-ahead	to
pursue	 the	 idea.	 Zhang	 put	 together	 a	 ten-person	 team,	 including	 seven
engineers,	to	build	and	launch	the	new	product.
In	 just	 two	 months,	 Zhang’s	 small	 team	 had	 built	 a	 mobile-first	 social
messaging	network	with	a	clean,	minimalistic	design	that	was	the	polar	opposite
of	 QQ.	 Ma	 named	 the	 service	 Weixin,	 which	 means	 “micromessage”	 in
Mandarin.	Outside	of	China,	the	service	became	known	as	WeChat.
What	came	next	was	staggering.	Just	sixteen	months	after	Zhang’s	fateful
late-night	message	to	Ma,	WeChat	celebrated	its	one	hundred	millionth	user.	Six
months	after	that,	it	had	grown	to	two	hundred	million	users.	Four	months	after
that,	it	had	grown	to	three	hundred	million	users.
Pony	 Ma’s	 late-night	 bet	 paid	 off	 handsomely.	 Tencent	 reported	 2016
revenues	of	$22	billion,	up	48	percent	from	the	previous	year,	and	up	nearly
700	 percent	 since	 2010,	 the	 year	 before	 WeChat’s	 launch.	 By	 early	 2018,
Tencent	reached	a	market	capitalization	of	over	$500	billion,	making	it	one	of
the	world’s	most	valuable	companies,	and	WeChat	was	one	of	the	most	widely
and	intensively	used	services	in	the	world.
Fast	Company	called	WeChat	“China’s	app	for	everything,”	and	the	Financial
Times	reported	that	more	than	half	of	its	users	spend	over	ninety	minutes	a	day
using	the	app.	To	put	WeChat	in	an	American	context,	it’s	as	if	one	single
service	combined	the	functions	of	Facebook,	WhatsApp,	Facebook	Messenger,
Venmo,	Grubhub,	Amazon,	Uber,	Apple	Pay,	Gmail,	and	even	Slack	into	a
single	 megaservice.	 You	 can	 use	 WeChat	 to	 do	 run-of-the-mill	 things	 like
texting	and	calling	people,	participating	in	social	media,	and	reading	articles,	but
you	can	also	book	a	taxi,	buy	movie	tickets,	make	doctors’	appointments,	send
money	to	friends,	play	games,	pay	your	rent,	order	dinner	for	the	night,	plus	so
much	more.	All	from	a	single	app	on	your	smartphone.
Ma	himself	recognized	the	importance	of	the	decision	he	had	made,	saying	in
an	interview,	“Looking	back,	those	two	months	were	a	matter	of	life	and	death.”
These	stories	of	extreme	growth,	whether	in	California	or	halfway	around	the
world	 in	 China,	 are	 perfect	 examples	 of	 why	 it’s	 valuable	 to	 study	 what
blitzscaling	is	and	how	it	works.
Throughout	 this	 book,	 we	 will	 be	 telling	 the	 stories	 of	 various	 blitzscalers.
Appendix	 B:	 The	 Blitzscalers	 includes	 brief	 profiles	 of	 these	 companies	 that
provide	more	context.	For	even	more	background,	visit	Blitzscaling.com.
BLITZSCALING:	THE	SECRET	WEAPON	FOR	BUILDING	SCALE-UPS
When	a	start-up	matures	to	the	point	where	it	has	a	killer	product,	a	clear	and
sizable	 market,	 and	 a	 robust	 distribution	 channel,	 it	 has	 the	 opportunity	 to
become	a	“scale-up,”	which	is	a	world-changing	company	that	touches	millions
or	even	billions	of	lives.	Often,	the	fastest	and	most	direct	path	from	start-up	to
scale-up	is	the	hypergrowth	produced	by	blitzscaling.
The	enterprise	software	company	Slack	reached	this	critical	stage	once	it	was
able	to	demonstrate	the	rapid	and	accelerating	adoption	of	its	team	messaging
apps	by	its	initial	market	of	software	development	teams.	Nearly	five	years
passed	between	the	time	when	Slack	was	founded	and	the	initial	launch	of	its
product.	But	once	it	launched,	Slack	users	themselves	drove	user	growth	by
adding	many	colleagues	at	a	time,	aided	by	a	frictionless	process	that	allowed
new	users	to	jump	in	with	a	simple	Web	application	or	by	downloading	a	mobile
app	from	iTunes	or	Google	Play.	After	the	company	reached	this	point,	it	began
to	scale	rapidly,	adding	employees,	capital,	and	customers	at	a	blistering	pace.
Slack	had	raised	$17	million	during	the	first	five	years	of	its	life;	within	eight
months	of	launch,	it	had	raised	another	$163	million	and	a	total	of	$800	million
by	late	2017.
Any	company,	whether	a	global	giant	or	a	start-up	in	a	cofounder’s	garage,
would	 love	 to	 launch	 and	 grow	 killer	 businesses	 like	 Airbnb,	 WeChat,	 and
Slack.	Yet	those	who	actually	manage	to	do	so,	especially	to	the	degree	that
Brian	Chesky	and	Pony	Ma	did,	are	still	exceedingly	rare.	Why	is	that?	What
sets	these	companies	apart	from	the	rest?
In	this	book,	we	will	argue	that	the	key	to	rapidly	building	massive	businesses
in	today’s	environment	is	the	aggressive	growth	strategy	of	blitzscaling:	a	set	of
techniques	 that	 allows	 both	 start-ups	 and	 established	 companies	 to	 build
dominant,	world-leading	businesses	in	record	time.
ENTERING	THE	BLITZSCALING	ERA
Over	the	past	two	decades,	the	Internet	has	completely	reshaped	both	our	daily
lives	and	the	world	of	business.	Netscape’s	blockbuster	IPO	on	August	9,	1995,
marked	the	beginning	of	both	the	dot-com	boom	and	what	I	call	the	Networked
Age.	At	the	time,	the	rising	stock	prices	of	the	dot-com	boom	attracted	the	most
attention,	 but,	 in	 retrospect,	 the	 biggest	 change	 was	 that	 the	 Internet	 was
beginning	 to	 connect	 all	 of	 us	 to	 people,	 information,	 resources,	 and	 other
networks.	There	have	been	other	revolutions	in	the	past—steam,	electricity,	and
radio	spring	to	mind—but	what	makes	the	impact	of	the	Internet	so	unique	and
so	far-reaching	is	the	fact	it	has	made	everything	so	much	faster.	Today,	every
individual	 can	 connect	 to	 any	 other	 individual	 immediately;	 that	 increased
velocity	is	what	makes	blitzscaling	possible	and	so	powerful.
The	speed	of	the	Internet	has	generated	a	number	of	second-order	effects	that
have	changed	how	businesses	and	organizations	can	grow.	For	example,	the
Internet	has	made	it	possible	to	access	global	markets	and	tap	into	massively
scalable	distribution	channels	in	a	way	that	wasn’t	feasible	during	earlier	eras.
But	 perhaps	 the	 most	 important	 impact	 for	 businesses	 has	 been	 the	 rising
significance	 and	 prevalence	 of	 so-called	 network	 effects	 that	 occur	 when
increased	usage	of	a	product	or	service	boosts	the	value	of	that	product	or
service	for	other	users.	For	example,	each	additional	Airbnb	host	makes	the
service	a	tiny	bit	more	valuable	for	every	other	Airbnb	guest	and	vice	versa.
Each	additional	WeChat	user	makes	the	service	a	tiny	bit	more	valuable	for
every	other	WeChat	user,	and	so	on.
Network	effects	generate	a	positive	feedback	loop	that	can	allow	the	first
product	 or	 service	 that	 taps	 into	 those	 effects	 to	 build	 an	 unassailable
competitive	advantage.	For	example,	eBay	was	founded	in	1995,	yet	network
effects	keep	it	a	dominant	player	in	peer-to-peer	commerce	two	decades	later.
Airbnb	offers	over	three	million	listings	in	sixty-five	thousand	cities	around	the
world;	think	of	how	difficult	it	would	be	for	a	new	entrant	to	offer	anywhere
close	to	the	same	selection	and	value.
We’re	reminded	of	the	famous	scene	from	the	movie	Glengarry	Glen	Ross,	in
which	Alec	Baldwin’s	character,	Blake,	is	speaking	to	a	group	of	salesmen:
As	you	all	know,	first	prize	is	a	Cadillac	Eldorado.	Anyone	wanna
see	second	prize?	Second	prize	is	a	set	of	steak	knives.	Third	prize
is	you’re	fired.	Get	the	picture?
First	prize	in	the	first	wave	of	consumer	social	networking	went	to	Facebook;
second	prize	to	MySpace;	third	prize	to	Friendster.	Remember	Friendster?	You
need	to	win	first	prize	in	order	to	survive	in	the	Internet	era.
The	level	of	competition	can	seem	overwhelming	at	times,	but	the	Networked
Age	also	allows	companies	to	reap	incredible	rewards	much	more	rapidly	than	at
any	other	point	in	history.	We	call	the	strategy	and	mindset	they	can	use	to	get
there	“blitzscaling.”
Blitzscaling	is	 a	 strategy	and	 set	 of	 techniques	for	 driving	 and	managing
extremely	rapid	growth	that	prioritize	speed	over	efficiency	in	an	environment	of
uncertainty.	Put	another	way,	it’s	an	accelerant	that	allows	your	company	to
grow	at	a	furious	pace	that	knocks	the	competition	out	of	the	water.
Blitzscaling	requires	hypergrowth	but	goes	beyond	the	blunt	strategy	of	“get
big	fast”	because	it	involves	purposefully	and	intentionally	doing	things	that
don’t	make	sense	according	to	traditional	business	thinking.	In	the	Blitzscaling
Era,	you	have	to	make	a	tough	call:
Take	on	the	additional	risk	and	discomfort	of	blitzscaling	your	company,
Or	accept	what	might	be	the	even	greater	risk	of	losing	if	your	competition
blitzscales	before	you	do.
Was	Airbnb’s	decision	to	expand	into	European	markets—a	move	that	could
have	 stretched	 the	 company	 so	 thin	 as	 to	 destroy	 its	 core	 business—either
efficient	or	certain?	Hardly.	Airbnb	could	easily	have	failed,	burning	through	all
its	capital	while	essentially	ceding	the	European	market	to	its	copycat	competitor
Wimdu.	Yet	the	risky	decision	proved	the	right	one.
Blitzscaling	 disrupts	 entire	 industries,	 such	 as	 music,	 video	 games,	 and
telephony,	with	both	new	technologies	and	new	business	models…and	those	are
examples	from	just	a	single	company.	(You	know,	the	one	that	produced	the
iPod,	iTunes,	the	iPhone,	and	the	iPad,	to	name	just	a	few.)	These	waves	of
disruption	affect	every	aspect	of	our	daily	lives,	from	the	jobs	we	work,	to	the
products	we	use,	to	the	way	we	connect	with	one	another.
Disruption	on	its	own	is	neither	good	nor	bad,	but	it	always	involves	change.
Replacing	a	$10	product	with	a	$1	product	of	equal	or	better	quality	looks	like	a
disaster	to	an	incumbent	player,	but,	for	society	as	a	whole,	it	means	greater
productivity.	The	buyer	gets	the	desired	product,	and	now	also	has	$9	available
to	invest	in	other	things.	Netflix	has	been	bad	news	for	broadcast	and	cable
networks,	 but	 it	 has	 been	 great	 news	 for	 fans	 and	 creators	 of	 movies	 and
television.	Yes,	disruption	produces	losers	as	well	as	winners,	but,	as	a	whole,	it
is	a	vital	source	of	growth	and	opportunity	that	you	can’t	afford	to	ignore.
It’s	good	to	keep	in	mind	that	those	who	extoll	the	virtues	of	disruption	tend
to	be—coincidentally	enough—the	ones	in	the	winners’	circle.	But	disruption
that	spreads	its	benefits	and	new	opportunities	broadly	is	better	for	society.
Fortunately,	most	disruption	falls	into	this	category.	In	a	2004	working	paper,
“Schumpeterian	Profits	in	the	American	Economy:	Theory	and	Measurement,”
Yale	economist	William	Nordhaus	examined	the	US	economy	from	1948	to
2001.	Based	on	the	data	he	collected,	he	concluded	that	only	2.2	percent	of
“profits	that	arise	when	firms	are	able	to	appropriate	the	returns	from	innovative
activity”	went	to	the	disrupters.	“Most	of	the	benefits	of	technological	change
are	passed	on	to	consumers	rather	than	captured	by	producers,”	he	concluded.
Like	it	or	not,	change	is	inevitable—but	it	doesn’t	have	to	be	wholly	unexpected.
In	their	book	Future	Shock,	the	futurists	Alvin	and	Heidi	Toffler	wrote	that
“change	is	the	only	constant,”	and	“to	survive,	to	avert	what	we	have	termed
future	shock,	the	individual	must	become	infinitely	more	adaptable	and	capable
than	ever	before.”	Those	words	were	originally	published	in	1970.	The	pace	of
change	has	only	accelerated	since	then.
Everyone	 should	 have	 the	 opportunity	 to	 learn	 how	 blitzscaling	 works,
because	it	is	already	impacting	their	lives.	And	once	they	know	how	it	works,
they	can	use	it	to	reshape	the	world.	People	should	be	part	of	building	the	future
rather	than	feeling	like	the	future	is	being	forced	upon	them.
Blitzscaling	is	what	separates	the	start-ups	that	get	disrupted	and	disappear	as
the	world	changes	from	the	ones	that	scale	up	to	become	market	leaders	and
shape	the	future.
This	book	was	born	out	of	a	class	we	taught	at	Stanford	in	which	we	dissected
the	process	that	went	into	growing	the	world’s	largest	technology	companies	and
then	codified	a	series	of	tactics	and	choices	that	made	it	work.	The	result	was	a
specific	 set	 of	 principles	 that	 describes	 how	 to	 grow	 multibillion-dollar
companies	in	a	handful	of	years.
While	writing	this	book,	we	talked	to	hundreds	of	entrepreneurs	and	CEOs,
including	those	of	the	world’s	most	valuable	companies,	such	as	Facebook,
Alphabet	(Google),	Netflix,	Dropbox,	Twitter,	and	Airbnb.	(You	can	hear	a
number	of	these	conversations	on	my	podcast,	Masters	of	Scale.)	Even	though
the	stories	of	their	companies’	rise	were	very	different	in	many	ways,	the	one
thing	they	all	had	in	common	was	an	extreme,	unwieldy,	risky,	inefficient,	do-
or-die	approach	to	growth.
In	this	book,	we	draw	lessons	from	these	world-leading	companies	to	explain
the	nuts	and	bolts	of	how	to	blitzscale,	when	to	blitzscale,	why	to	blitzscale,	and
the	global	impact	of	the	companies	that	are	blitzscaling	all	around	you	right	this
second.
This	quest	will	take	us	all	over	the	globe,	but	one	place	in	particular	stands
out.
SILICON	VALLEY:	THE	PERFECT	PLACE	TO	DECODE
BLITZSCALING
Although	companies	have	successfully	blitzscaled	on	every	continent	except	for
Antarctica,	the	most	prominent	and	most	concentrated	set	of	examples	comes
from	California’s	Silicon	Valley.	And	while	we	can’t	simply	copy	and	paste	the
techniques	that	work	in	Silicon	Valley	and	expect	them	to	work	the	same	way	in
Shanghai,	neither	can	we	cut	and	paste	from	Shanghai	to	Stockholm,	nor	from
Stockholm	to	São	Paulo.	Instead,	we	try	to	extract	some	universal	lessons	and
then	explore	how	they	apply	across	the	world.
As	of	this	writing	at	the	end	of	2017,	there	are	only	fourteen	publicly	traded
technology	companies	in	the	world	that	have	a	market	capitalization	of	over
$100	billion.	Want	to	guess	how	many	of	those	are	in	Silicon	Valley?	Seven—
that’s	half	of	the	world’s	most	valuable	tech	companies.
Taken	 together,	 Silicon	 Valley’s	 150	 most	 valuable	 publicly	 traded
technology	companies	are	worth	$3.5	trillion.	That	number	is	so	big	it	doesn’t
mean	anything	to	most	of	us.	So	consider	this:	those	150	companies	alone	make
up	50	percent	of	the	value	of	the	NASDAQ,	and	they	account	for	over	5	percent
of	the	entire	world’s	market	capitalization.	That’s	a	lot	of	value	created	by	a
region	with	an	estimated	3.5	to	4	million	residents,	or	roughly	0.05	percent	of
the	world’s	population.
While	we	fully	accept	that	this	may	change	in	the	future,	the	historical	and
current	success	of	Silicon	Valley	makes	it	the	perfect	place	to	examine	this
question:	What	is	the	most	effective	way	to	rapidly	build	massively	valuable
companies?
When	outsiders	look	at	Silicon	Valley,	they	often	think	that	the	key	to	this
question	is	innovative	technology.	But	as	you’ll	read,	technological	innovation
alone	doesn’t	make	for	a	thriving	company.
Silicon	Valley	insiders	and	well-read	outsiders	believe	that	the	key	is	the
combination	of	talent,	capital,	and	entrepreneurial	culture	that	makes	it	easy	to
start	new	companies.	This	too	is	wrong.
Sure,	Silicon	Valley	is	the	leading	hub	for	high-tech	talent	and	venture	capital,
but	it	didn’t	start	out	that	way.	Sure,	it	is	blessed	with	great	universities,	such	as
Stanford	and	Berkeley,	but	so	are	plenty	of	other	regions.	The	answer	can’t	be
simply	 the	 combination	 of	 venture	 capital,	 research	 universities,	 and	 smart
people.	This	combination	of	ingredients	is	far	from	unique.	In	fact,	the	same
basic	ingredients	can	easily	be	found	in	numerous	start-up	clusters	in	the	United
States	 and	 around	 the	 world:	 Austin,	 Boston,	 New	 York,	 Seattle,	 Shanghai,
Bangalore,	Istanbul,	Stockholm,	Tel	Aviv,	and	Dubai.
To	discover	the	secret	to	Silicon	Valley’s	success,	you	need	to	look	beyond
the	standard	origin	story.	When	people	think	of	Silicon	Valley,	the	first	things
that	spring	to	mind—after	the	HBO	television	show,	of	course—are	the	names
of	 famous	 start-ups	 and	 their	 equally	 glamorized	 founders:	 Apple,	 Google,
Facebook;	Jobs/Wozniak,	Page/Brin,	Zuckerberg.
The	success	narrative	of	these	hallowed	names	has	become	so	universally
familiar	that	people	from	countries	around	the	world	can	tell	it	just	as	well	as
Sand	 Hill	 Road	 venture	 capitalists.	 It	 goes	 something	 like	 this:	 A	 brilliant
entrepreneur	discovers	an	incredible	opportunity.	After	dropping	out	of	college,
he	or	she	gathers	a	small	team	who	are	happy	to	work	for	equity,	sets	up	shop	in
a	humble	garage,	plays	foosball,	raises	money	from	sage	venture	capitalists,	and
proceeds	to	change	the	world—after	which,	of	course,	the	founders	and	early
employees	live	happily	ever	after,	using	the	wealth	they’ve	amassed	to	fund	both
a	new	generation	of	entrepreneurs	and	a	set	of	eponymous	buildings	for	Stanford
University’s	Computer	Science	Department.
It’s	an	exciting	and	inspiring	story.	We	get	the	appeal.	There’s	only	one
problem.	It’s	incomplete	and	deceptive	in	several	important	ways.
First,	while	“Silicon	Valley”	and	“start-ups”	are	used	almost	synonymously
these	days,	only	a	tiny	fraction	of	the	world’s	start-ups	actually	originate	in
Silicon	Valley,	and	this	fraction	has	been	getting	smaller	as	start-up	knowledge
spreads	around	the	globe.	Thanks	to	the	Internet,	entrepreneurs	everywhere	have
access	to	the	same	information.	Moreover,	as	other	markets	have	matured,	smart
founders	from	around	the	globe	are	electing	to	build	companies	in	start-up	hubs
in	their	home	countries	rather	than	immigrating	to	Silicon	Valley.
Second,	simply	starting	a	company	is	obviously	insufficient.	The	start-ups	that
achieve	massive	value	are	those	that	have	found	a	way	to	grow	into	scale-ups	at
an	exponentially	faster	pace	than	their	competitors.
So	what	secret	alchemy	is	at	work	in	Silicon	Valley	to	fuel	such	rapid-fire
growth	of	so	many	of	the	world’s	most	valuable	tech	companies?	And	if	there	is
a	secret,	can	it	be	identified,	analyzed,	understood,	and,	most	important,	applied
elsewhere?
Blitzscaling	is	that	secret.	And	the	reason	blitzscaling	matters	so	much	is	that
nothing	about	it	is	inherent	to	Silicon	Valley.
There’s	a	common	misconception	that	Silicon	Valley	is	the	accelerator	of	the
world.	The	real	story	is	that	the	world	keeps	getting	faster—Silicon	Valley	is	just
the	first	place	to	figure	out	how	to	keep	pace.	While	Silicon	Valley	certainly	has
many	key	networks	and	resources	that	make	it	easier	to	apply	the	techniques
we’re	going	to	lay	out	for	you,	blitzscaling	is	made	up	of	basic	principles	that	do
not	depend	on	geography.	We’re	going	to	show	you	examples	from	overlooked
parts	of	the	United	States,	such	as	Detroit	(Rocket	Mortgage)	and	Connecticut
(Priceline),	 as	 well	 as	 from	 international	 companies,	 such	 as	 WeChat	 and
Spotify.	In	the	process	you’ll	see	how	the	lessons	of	blitzscaling	can	be	adapted
to	help	build	great	companies	in	nearly	any	ecosystem,	albeit	with	differing
degrees	of	difficulty.
That’s	the	mission	of	this	book.	We	want	to	share	the	secret	weapon	that	has
allowed	Silicon	Valley	to	punch	so	much	(more	than	a	hundred	times)	above	its
population	index	so	that	those	lessons	can	be	applied	far	beyond	the	sixty-mile
stretch	between	the	Golden	Gate	Bridge	and	San	Jose.
It	is	sorely	needed.
Here’s	a	startling	fact:	the	global	economy	will	need	to	create	six	hundred
million	new	jobs	by	2030	to	meet	the	United	Nations’	sustainable	development
goals.	That’s	less	than	fifteen	years	away.	The	world	needs	more	than	just	new
companies	and	new	jobs;	it’s	going	to	need	entire	new	industries.
Those	industries	better	generate	scale-ups	as	well	as	start-ups.	It	seems	to	us
that	it	will	be	a	lot	easier	to	add	six	hundred	million	new	jobs	worldwide	by
creating	sixty	thousand	new	ten-thousand-person	companies	rather	than	sixty
million	new	ten-person	companies.
The	late,	great	Andy	Grove,	Intel’s	legendary	CEO,	understood	and	explained
this	when	he	wrote	in	a	2010	op-ed	for	Bloomberg:
Start-ups	 are	 a	 wonderful	 thing,	 but	 they	 cannot	 by	 themselves
increase	tech	employment.	Equally	important	is	what	comes	after
that	mythical	moment	of	creation	in	the	garage,	as	technology	goes
from	 prototype	 to	 mass	 production.	 This	 is	 the	 phase	 where
companies	scale	up.	They	work	out	design	details,	figure	out	how	to
make	 things	 affordably,	 build	 factories,	 and	 hire	 people	 by	 the
thousands.	Scaling	is	hard	work	but	necessary	to	make	innovation
matter.
Recognizing	 what	 powers	 the	 rapid	 growth	 from	 start-up	 to	 scale-up,	 and
understanding	the	principles	behind	how	it	works,	will	help	entrepreneurs	and
companies	apply	these	principles	not	just	in	small	pockets	of	the	United	States
and	China	but	around	the	world.
WHO	SHOULD	READ	THIS	BOOK?
This	book	is	for	anyone	who	wants	to	understand	the	techniques	that	allow	a
business	to	grow	from	zero	to	a	multibillion-dollar	market	leader	in	a	handful	of
years.
These	techniques	should	be	of	interest	to	entrepreneurs	who	want	to	build
massive	companies,	venture	capitalists	who	want	to	invest	in	them,	employees
who	want	to	work	for	them,	and	governments	and	communities	who	wish	to
encourage	the	growth	of	these	companies	in	their	own	regions.	And	even	if	you
don’t	want	to	build,	invest	in,	or	work	for	any	of	these	companies,	you’ll	still
need	to	navigate	the	world	that	they’re	building.
If	you	are	a	manager	or	a	leader	who	is	trying	to	rapidly	scale	a	project	or	a
business	unit	within	a	larger	company,	blitzscaling	can	help	you	too.	And	while
we	 draw	 these	 lessons	 primarily	 from	 the	 world	 of	 high	 tech,	 many	 of	 the
principles	 and	 frameworks	 the	 book	 lays	 out	 (especially	 regarding	 people
management)	 are	 applicable	 to	 high-growth	 companies	 in	 most	 industries
worldwide,	from	European	fast-fashion	retailers	to	Texan	oil	shale	companies.
Even	organizations	outside	the	business	world	can	use	blitzscaling	to	their
advantage.	 Upstart	 presidential	 campaigns	 and	 nonprofits	 serving	 the
underprivileged	have	used	the	levers	of	blitzscaling	to	overturn	conventional
wisdom	and	achieve	massive	results.	You’ll	read	all	these	stories,	and	many
more,	in	the	pages	of	this	book.
Whether	you	are	a	founder,	a	manager,	a	potential	employee,	or	an	investor,
we	 believe	 that	 understanding	 blitzscaling	 will	 allow	 you	 to	 make	 better
decisions	in	a	world	where	speed	is	the	critical	competitive	advantage.
With	the	power	of	blitzscaling,	the	adopted	son	of	a	Syrian	immigrant	(Steve
Jobs),	the	adopted	son	of	a	Cuban	immigrant	(Jeff	Bezos),	and	a	former	English
teacher	and	volunteer	tour	guide	(Jack	Ma)	were	all	able	to	build	businesses	that
changed—and	are	still	changing—the	world.
The	 strategy	 and	 techniques	 we	 describe	 in	 this	 book	 are	 based	 on	 my
experiences	as	a	member	of	the	founding	team	at	PayPal;	as	the	cofounder,
CEO,	 and	 now	 executive	 chairman	 at	 LinkedIn;	 as	 a	 leading	 investor	 in
Facebook	and	Airbnb;	and	as	an	investor	at	Greylock	Partners,	where	I	worked
with	many	other	billion-dollar	companies,	such	as	Workday,	Pandora,	Cloudera,
and	Pure	Storage.	My	partners	at	Greylock	and	I	have	helped	these	companies
go	from	garage	to	global	dominance,	and,	in	this	book,	we’ll	share	with	you
what	we	believe	are	important	frameworks	for	understanding	and	addressing	the
challenge	of	blitzscaling	across	the	different	elements	of	your	organization.
Yet	as	many	good	business	books	disclaim,	while	this	is	a	playbook	and	a
strategy	guide,	it	isn’t	a	book	of	precise	recipes.	Regardless	of	how	the	popular
press	portrays	things,	each	formula	for	building	a	great	company	is	unique	and
depends	on	the	market	opportunity,	the	founders,	and	the	network	in	which	they
operate.	The	truth	is	there	is	absolutely	nothing	guaranteed	as	a	one-size-fits-all,
must-follow	rulebook	for	everyone.	However,	there	are	patterns.	So	in	addition
to	individual	tips	and	tricks,	this	book	offers	a	set	of	frameworks	and	strategies
for	leaders,	entrepreneurs,	and	intrapreneurs	to	adapt	to	their	own	needs	and
circumstances.
A	QUICK	NOTE	ON	THE	TERM	“BLITZSCALING”
The	term	“blitzscaling”	derives	from	the	twentieth-century	usage	of	“blitz”	as	a
way	of	describing	a	sudden,	all-out	effort.	The	first	usage	of	blitz	in	this	way
was	to	describe	the	“blitzkrieg”	(“lightning	war”)	strategy	that	General	Heinz
Guderian	devised	for	the	initial	military	campaigns	of	Nazi	Germany	during
World	War	II.	Ironically	enough,	Guderian	was	heavily	influenced	by	British
military	 thinkers	 like	 Basil	 Liddell	 Hart	 and	 J.	 F.	 C.	 Fuller,	 and	 the	 term
“blitzkrieg”	was	actually	popularized	by	the	British	press;	the	German	military
never	formally	adopted	it.
The	advancing	armies	in	these	campaigns	abandoned	the	traditional	approach
of	moving	at	the	slow	pace	at	which	they	could	establish	secure	lines	of	supply
and	retreat.	Instead	they	fully	committed	to	an	offensive	strategy	that	accepted
the	 possibility	 of	 running	 out	 of	 fuel,	 provisions,	 and	 ammunition,	 risking
potentially	disastrous	defeat	in	order	to	maximize	speed	and	surprise.	The	speed
of	these	armies’	advance	shocked	and	overwhelmed	their	opponents,	allowing
the	blitzkriegers	to	outmaneuver	and	outfight	the	defending	forces.
The	early	success	of	the	German	army	helped	spread	the	lessons	of	blitzkrieg
to	all	the	forces	in	the	war.	For	example,	the	American	general	George	S.	Patton
later	put	these	lessons	to	good	use	in	leading	the	US	Third	Army’s	advance	from
the	beaches	of	Normandy	all	the	way	to	Berlin.	Since	then,	the	term	“blitz”	has
been	used	to	describe	everything	from	an	American	football	play	to	the	way	in
which	large	corporations	roll	out	new	products.	Like	the	all-out	blitz	defense	in
football—which	involves	the	risky	move	of	sending	every	available	defender	to
pursue	the	quarterback—or	the	proverbial	marketing	blitz	of	television,	print,
and	online	advertising	that	accompanies	the	release	of	a	new	blockbuster	movie,
blitzscaling	 strives	 for	 a	 relentless	 and	 dizzying	 speed	 that	 overwhelms	 the
market.
While	we	are	wary	of	the	negative	connotations	of	“blitz,”	especially	in	those
nations	that	felt	the	effects	of	blitzkrieg	in	World	War	II,	we	believe	that	the
strength	of	the	metaphor	and	the	widespread	and	colloquial	use	of	the	term	in
nonmilitary	contexts	make	it	the	best	fit	for	the	concepts	discussed	in	this	book.
PART	I
What	Is	Blitzscaling?
Blitzscaling	 is	 what	 we	 call	 both	 the	 general	 framework	 and	 the	 specific
techniques	that	allow	companies	to	achieve	massive	scale	at	incredible	speed.	If
you’re	growing	at	a	rate	that	is	so	much	faster	than	your	competitors	that	it
makes	you	feel	uncomfortable,	then	hold	on	tight,	you	might	be	blitzscaling!
Amazon’s	incredible	growth	in	the	late	1990s	(and	up	through	today)	is	a
prime	 example	 of	 blitzscaling.	 In	 1996,	 a	 pre-IPO	 Amazon	 Books	 had	 151
employees	and	generated	revenues	of	$5.1	million.	By	1999,	the	now-public
Amazon.com	 had	 grown	 to	 7,600	 employees	 and	 generated	 revenues	 of
$1.64	billion.	That’s	a	50	times	increase	in	staff	and	a	322	times	increase	in
revenue	in	just	three	years.	In	2017,	Amazon	had	541,900	employees	and	was
forecast	to	generate	revenues	of	$177	billion	(up	from	$136	billion	in	2016).
Dropbox	founder	Drew	Houston	described	the	feeling	produced	by	this	kind
of	growth	when	he	told	me,	“It’s	like	harpooning	a	whale.	The	good	news	is,
you’ve	harpooned	a	whale.	And	the	bad	news	is,	you’ve	harpooned	a	whale!”
While	blitzscaling	may	seem	desirable,	it	is	also	fraught	with	challenges.
Blitzscaling	is	just	about	as	counterintuitive	as	it	comes.	The	classic	approach	to
business	strategy	involves	gathering	information	and	making	decisions	when
you	can	be	reasonably	confident	of	the	results.	Take	risks,	conventional	wisdom
says,	but	take	calculated	ones	that	you	can	both	measure	and	afford.	Implicitly,
this	technique	prioritizes	correctness	and	efficiency	over	speed.
Unfortunately,	 this	 cautious	 and	 measured	 approach	 falls	 apart	 when	 new
technologies	enable	a	new	market	or	scramble	an	existing	one.
Chris	 earned	 his	 MBA	 from	 Harvard	 Business	 School	 in	 the	 late	 1990s,
during	the	dawn	of	the	Networked	Age.	Back	then,	his	MBA	training	focused	on
traditional	 techniques,	 such	 as	 using	 discounted	 cash	 flow	 analysis	 to	 make
financial	decisions	with	greater	certainty.	Chris	also	learned	about	traditional
manufacturing	 techniques,	 such	 as	 how	 to	 maximize	 the	 throughput	 of	 an
assembly	line.	These	methods	focused	on	achieving	efficiency	and	certainty,	and
the	same	emphasis	was	reflected	in	the	broader	business	world.	The	world’s
most	valuable	company	during	that	time,	General	Electric,	was	beloved	by	Wall
Street	 analysts	 for	 its	 ability	 to	 deliver	 consistent	 and	 predictable	 earnings
growth.	 But	 efficiency	 and	 certainty,	 while	 innately	 appealing,	 and	 very
important	in	the	context	of	a	stable,	established	market,	offer	little	guidance	to
the	disrupters,	inventors,	and	innovators	of	the	world.
When	a	market	is	up	for	grabs,	the	risk	isn’t	inefficiency—the	risk	is	playing
it	too	safe.	If	you	win,	efficiency	isn’t	that	important;	if	you	lose,	efficiency	is
completely	irrelevant.	Over	the	years,	many	have	criticized	Amazon	for	its	risky
strategy	of	consuming	capital	without	delivering	consistent	profits,	but	Amazon
is	probably	glad	that	its	“inefficiency”	helped	it	win	several	key	markets—online
retail,	ebooks,	and	cloud	computing,	to	name	just	a	few.
When	you	blitzscale,	you	deliberately	make	decisions	and	commit	to	them
even	though	your	confidence	level	is	substantially	lower	than	100	percent.	You
accept	the	risk	of	making	the	wrong	decision	and	willingly	pay	the	cost	of
significant	operating	inefficiencies	in	exchange	for	the	ability	to	move	faster.
These	risks	and	costs	are	acceptable	because	the	risk	and	cost	of	being	too	slow
is	even	greater.	But	blitzscaling	is	more	than	just	plunging	ahead	blindly	in	an
effort	to	“get	big	fast”	to	win	the	market.	To	mitigate	the	downside	of	the	risks
you	take,	you	should	try	to	focus	them—line	them	up	with	a	small	number	of
hypotheses	about	how	your	business	will	develop	so	that	you	can	more	easily
understand	and	monitor	what	drives	your	success	or	failure.	You	also	have	to	be
prepared	to	execute	with	more	than	100	percent	effort	to	compensate	for	the	bets
that	don’t	go	your	way.
For	example,	anyone	who	knows	Jeff	Bezos	knows	that	he	didn’t	simply	mash
his	foot	down	on	the	gas	pedal;	Amazon	has	intentionally	invested	aggressively
in	 the	 future,	 and,	 despite	 its	 accounting	 losses,	 generates	 a	 ton	 of	 cash.
Amazon’s	 operating	 cash	 flow	 was	 over	 $16	 billion	 in	 2016,	 but	 it	 spent
$10	 billion	 in	 investments	 and	 $4	 billion	 paying	 down	 debt.	 Its	 seemingly
meager	profits	are	a	feature	of	its	aggressive	strategy,	not	a	bug.
Blitzscaling	 requires	 more	 than	 just	 courage	 and	 skill	 on	 the	 part	 of	 the
entrepreneur.	It	also	requires	an	environment	that	is	willing	to	finance	intelligent
risks	 with	 both	 financial	 capital	 and	 human	 capital,	 which	 are	 the	 essential
ingredients	for	blitzscaling.	Think	of	them	as	fuel	and	oxygen;	you	need	both	to
propel	the	rocket	skyward.	Meanwhile,	the	infrastructure	of	your	organization	is
the	actual	structure	of	your	rocket,	which	you’re	rebuilding	on	the	fly	as	you
rise.	Your	job	as	a	leader	and	an	entrepreneur	is	to	make	sure	that	you	have
sufficient	fuel	to	propel	your	growth	while	making	the	necessary	mechanical
adjustments	to	the	actual	rocket	ship	to	keep	it	from	flying	apart	as	it	accelerates.
Fortunately,	this	is	more	possible	today	than	it	has	ever	been	in	the	past.
SOFTWARE	IS	EATING	(AND	SAVING)	THE	WORLD
Historically,	 stories	 of	 breakneck	 growth	 involved	 either	 computer	 software,
which	offers	nearly	unlimited	scalability	in	terms	of	distribution,	or	software-
enabled	hardware,	such	as	the	Fitbit	fitness	tracker	or	Tesla	electric	car,	whose
software	component	allows	the	company	to	innovate	on	software	timescales
(days	or	weeks)	rather	than	hardware	timescales	(years).	Moreover,	the	speed
and	flexibility	of	software	development	allow	companies	to	iterate	and	recover
from	the	inevitable	missteps	of	haste.
What’s	especially	exciting	these	days	is	that	software	and	software-enabled
companies	are	starting	to	dominate	industries	outside	of	traditional	high	tech.
My	friend	Marc	Andreessen	has	argued	that	“software	is	eating	the	world.”
What	he	means	is	that	even	industries	that	focus	on	physical	products	(atoms)
are	integrating	with	software	(bits).	Tesla	makes	cars	(atoms),	but	a	software
update	(bits)	can	upgrade	the	acceleration	of	those	cars	and	add	an	autopilot
overnight.
The	spread	of	software	and	computing	into	every	industry,	along	with	the
dense	networks	that	connect	us	all,	means	that	the	lessons	of	blitzscaling	are
becoming	more	relevant	and	easier	to	implement,	even	in	mature	or	low-tech
industries.	To	use	a	computing	metaphor,	technology	is	accelerating	the	world’s
“clock	 speed”	 (the	 rate	 at	 which	 Central	 Processing	 Units	 [CPUs]	 operate),
making	change	occur	faster	than	previously	thought	possible.	Not	only	is	the
world	moving	faster,	but	the	speed	at	which	major	new	technology	platforms	are
being	created	is	reducing	the	downtime	between	the	arrivals	of	each	wave	of
innovation.	Before,	individual	waves	would	sweep	through	the	economy	one	at	a
time—technologies	like	personal	computers,	disk	drives,	and	CD-ROMs.	Today,
multiple	major	waves	seem	to	be	arriving	simultaneously—technologies	like	the
cloud,	AI,	AR/VR,	not	to	mention	more	esoteric	projects	like	supersonic	planes
and	 hyperloops.	 What’s	 more,	 rather	 than	 being	 concentrated	 narrowly	 in	 a
personal	computer	industry	that	was	essentially	a	niche	market,	today’s	new
technologies	 impact	 nearly	 every	 part	 of	 the	 economy,	 creating	 many	 new
opportunities.
This	trend	holds	tremendous	promise.	Precision	medicine	will	use	computing
power	to	revolutionize	health	care.	Smart	grids	use	software	to	dramatically
improve	power	efficiency	and	enable	the	spread	of	renewable	energy	sources
like	solar	roofs.	And	computational	biology	might	allow	us	to	improve	life	itself.
Blitzscaling	can	help	these	advances	spread	and	magnify	their	sorely	needed
impact.
THE	TYPES	OF	SCALING
Blitzscaling	isn’t	simply	a	matter	of	rapid	growth.	Every	company	is	obsessed
with	growth.	In	any	industry,	you	live	and	die	by	the	numbers—user	acquisition,
margins,	growth	rate,	and	so	on.	Yet	growth	alone	is	not	blitzscaling.	Rather,
blitzscaling	is	prioritizing	speed	over	efficiency	in	the	face	of	uncertainty.	We
can	 better	 understand	 blitzscaling	 by	 comparing	 it	 to	 other	 forms	 of	 rapid
growth.
Efficiency Speed
Uncertainty Classic	Start-up	Growth Blitzscaling
Certainty Classic	Scale-up	Growth Fastscaling
Classic	 start-up	 growth	 prioritizes	 efficiency	 in	 the	 face	 of	 uncertainty.
Starting	a	company	is	like	jumping	off	a	cliff	and	assembling	an	airplane	on	the
way	down;	being	resource-efficient	lets	you	“glide”	to	minimize	the	rate	of
descent,	giving	you	the	time	to	learn	things	about	your	market,	technology,	and
team	before	you	hit	the	ground.	This	kind	of	controlled,	efficient	growth	reduces
uncertainty	and	is	a	good	strategy	to	follow	while	you’re	trying	to	establish
certainty	around	what	the	authors	Eric	Ries	and	Steve	Blank	call	product/market
fit:	your	product	satisfies	a	strong	market	demand	for	the	solution	to	a	specific
problem	or	need.
Classic	scale-up	growth	focuses	on	growing	efficiently	once	the	company
has	achieved	certainty	about	the	environment.	This	approach	reflects	classic
corporate	management	techniques,	such	as	applying	“hurdle	rates”	so	that	the
return	on	investment	(ROI)	of	corporate	projects	consistently	exceeds	the	cost	of
capital.	This	kind	of	optimization	is	a	good	strategy	to	follow	when	you’re	trying
to	maximize	returns	in	an	established,	stable	market.
Fastscaling	means	that	you’re	willing	to	sacrifice	efficiency	for	the	sake	of
increasing	your	growth	rate.	However,	because	fastscaling	takes	place	in	an
environment	 of	 certainty,	 the	 costs	 are	 well	 understood	 and	 predictable.
Fastscaling	is	a	good	strategy	for	gaining	market	share	or	trying	to	achieve
revenue	milestones.	Indeed,	the	financial	services	industry	is	often	happy	to
finance	 fastscaling,	 whether	 by	 buying	 stocks	 and	 bonds	 or	 lending	 money.
Analysts	 and	 bankers	 feel	 confident	 that	 they	 can	 create	 elaborate	 financial
models	that	work	out	to	the	penny	the	likely	ROI	of	a	fastscaling	investment.
Blitzscaling	means	that	you’re	willing	to	sacrifice	efficiency	for	speed,	but
without	waiting	to	achieve	certainty	on	whether	the	sacrifice	will	pay	off.	If
classic	 start-up	 growth	 is	 about	 slowing	 your	 rate	 of	 descent	 as	 you	 try	 to
assemble	your	plane,	blitzscaling	is	about	assembling	that	plane	faster,	then
strapping	on	and	igniting	a	set	of	jet	engines	(and	possibly	their	afterburners)
while	you’re	still	building	the	wings.	It’s	“do	or	die,”	with	either	success	or
death	occurring	in	a	remarkably	short	time.
Given	these	definitions,	you	might	wonder	why	anyone	would	ever	pursue
blitzscaling.	 After	 all,	 it	 combines	 the	 gut-wrenching	 uncertainty	 of	 start-up
growth	 with	 the	 potential	 for	 a	 much	 bigger,	 more	 embarrassing,	 more
consequential	failure.	Blitzscaling	is	also	hard	to	implement.	Unless	you’re	like
Microsoft	 or	 Google	 and	 can	 finance	 your	 growth	 from	 an	 exponentially
growing	revenue	stream,	you’ll	need	to	convince	investors	to	give	you	money,
and	it’s	much	harder	to	raise	money	from	investors	for	a	calculated	gamble
(blitzscaling)	than	for	a	sure	thing	(fastscaling).	To	make	matters	worse,	you
usually	need	more	money	to	blitzscale	than	to	fastscale,	because	you	have	to
keep	enough	capital	in	reserve	to	recover	from	the	many	mistakes	you’re	likely
to	make	along	the	way.
Yet	despite	all	of	these	potential	pitfalls,	blitzscaling	remains	a	powerful	tool
for	entrepreneurs	and	other	business	leaders.	If	you’re	willing	to	accept	the	risks
of	blitzscaling	when	others	aren’t,	you’ll	be	able	to	move	faster	than	they	will.	If
the	prize	to	be	won	is	big	enough,	and	the	competition	to	win	it	is	intense
enough,	blitzscaling	becomes	a	rational,	even	optimal	strategy.
Once	you	convince	the	market	for	capital	and	the	market	for	talent—which
include	clients	and	partners,	as	well	as	employees—to	invest	in	your	scale-up,
you	have	the	fuel	required	to	start	blitzscaling.	At	that	point,	your	objective
switches	from	going	from	zero	to	one	to	going	from	one	to	one	billion	in	an
incredibly	compressed	time	frame.
A	company	might	employ	different	types	of	scaling	at	different	points	in	its
life	cycle.	The	canonical	sequence	that	companies	like	Google	and	Facebook
have	 gone	 through	 begins	 with	 classic	 start-up	 growth	 while	 establishing
product/market	fit,	then	shifts	into	blitzscaling	to	achieve	critical	mass	and/or
market	dominance	ahead	of	the	competition,	then	relaxes	down	to	fastscaling	as
the	business	matures,	and	finally	downshifts	to	classic	scale-up	growth	when	the
company	is	an	established	industry	leader.	Together,	this	sequence	of	scaling
generates	a	classic	“S-curve”	of	growth,	with	slower	initial	growth	followed	by
rapid	acceleration,	eventually	easing	its	way	into	a	gentle	plateau.
Of	course,	this	canonical	sequence	is	greatly	simplified.	The	scaling	cycle
applies	not	just	to	whole	companies	but	to	individual	products	and	business
lines;	the	aggregate	curves	of	these	scaling	cycles	generate	the	overall	scaling
curve	for	the	company.
For	example,	Facebook	began	as	a	classic	blitzscaling	story.	The	year-over-
year	revenue	growth	during	its	first	few	years	of	existence	were	2,150	percent,
433	percent,	and	219	percent,	going	from	zero	to	$153	million	in	revenue	in
2007.	Then	the	company	went	through	a	key	transition,	and	growth	dropped	into
the	double-digit	range	as	Facebook	struggled	with	both	monetization	and	the
shift	from	desktop	to	mobile.	Fortunately,	Facebook	founder	Mark	Zuckerberg
made	 two	 important	 moves:	 he	 personally	 led	 a	 shift	 from	 desktop-first	 to
mobile-first,	and	he	hired	Sheryl	Sandberg	as	the	company’s	COO,	who	in	turn
built	Facebook	into	an	advertising	sales	juggernaut.	Growth	rose	back	into	the
triple-digit	range,	and,	by	2010,	these	moves	had	pushed	Facebook’s	revenues	to
over	$2	billion.	We’ll	examine	both	of	these	key	moves	in	greater	detail	later	in
the	book,	with	Facebook’s	shift	to	mobile	featured	in	our	analysis	of	Facebook’s
business	model,	and	Facebook’s	hiring	of	Sheryl	Sandberg	in	the	section	on	the
key	transition	from	contributors	to	managers	to	executives.
Apple	illustrates	how	this	overlap	looks	over	multiple	decades.	In	its	storied
history,	 Apple	 went	 through	 complete	 scaling	 cycles	 for	 the	 Apple	 II,	 the
Macintosh,	the	iMac,	and	the	iPod	(with	the	cycle	for	the	iPhone	still	under
way).	It’s	worth	noting	that	Apple	failed	to	launch	any	blitzscalable	products
after	the	Apple	II	and	the	Mac	until	Steve	Jobs	returned	and	launched	the	iMac,
iPod,	and	iPhone.	It	was	part	of	Steve’s	rare	genius	that	time	and	time	again	he
was	able	to	pick	the	right	product	for	Apple	to	blitzscale,	even	without	slowing
down	for	a	period	of	classic	start-up	growth	to	gather	feedback	from	the	market.
The	 scaling	 curve	 applies	 to	 every	 blitzscaler,	 regardless	 of	 industry	 or
geography.	The	same	multiple	S-curve	graph	that	describes	Facebook	or	Apple
also	describes	Tencent,	which	launched	with	QQ,	then	added	a	second	curve	for
WeChat	 after	 QQ	 reached	 maturity	 in	 2010.	 Just	 when	 you’ve	 finished
blitzscaling	one	business	line,	you	need	to	blitzscale	the	next	to	maintain	your
company’s	 upward	 trajectory.	 And	 as	 blitzscaling	 continues	 to	 spread,
established	companies	with	mature	business	lines	should	consider	turning	to
intrapreneurs	to	blitzscale	new	business	units.
THE	THREE	BASICS	OF	BLITZSCALING
Blitzscaling	 requires	 you	 to	 move	 at	 a	 pace	 that	 is	 almost	 certainly
uncomfortable	for	your	team.	You	will	definitely	make	many	mistakes	as	you
navigate	an	environment	full	of	uncertainty;	the	art	lies	in	developing	the	skill	to
learn	quickly	from	those	mistakes	and	return	to	a	relentlessly	rapid	advance.	But
first,	it’s	critical	to	understand	three	basics.
1.	BLITZSCALING	IS	BOTH	AN	OFFENSIVE	STRATEGY	AND	A
DEFENSIVE	STRATEGY.
On	offense,	blitzscaling	allows	you	to	do	several	things.	First,	you	can	take	the
market	 by	 surprise,	 bypassing	 heavily	 defended	 niches	 to	 exploit	 breakout
opportunities.	For	example,	Slack’s	rapid	growth	after	its	launch	blindsided	a
host	of	entrenched	competitors	like	Microsoft	and	Salesforce.com.	Second,	you
can	leverage	your	lead	to	build	long-term	competitive	advantages	before	other
players	are	able	to	respond.	We’ll	explore	this	concept	in	greater	detail	later	on.
Third,	blitzscaling	opens	up	access	to	capital,	because	investors	generally	prefer
to	back	market	leaders.	You	can	win	this	mantle	if	you	blitzscale,	and	with	it
raise	more	money	more	easily	and	more	quickly	than	your	lagging	competitors.
On	 defense,	 blitzscaling	 lets	 you	 set	 a	 pace	 that	 keeps	 your	 competitors
gasping	simply	to	keep	up,	affording	them	little	time	and	space	to	counterattack.
Because	they’re	focused	on	responding	to	your	moves,	which	can	often	take
them	by	surprise	and	force	them	to	play	catch-up,	they	don’t	have	as	much	time
available	to	develop	and	execute	differentiated	strategies	that	might	threaten
your	position.	Blitzscaling	helps	you	determine	the	playing	field	to	your	great
advantage.
2.	BLITZSCALING	THRIVES	ON	POSITIVE	FEEDBACK	LOOPS,	IN
THAT	THE	COMPANY	THAT	GROWS	TO	SCALE	FIRST	REAPS
SIGNIFICANT	COMPETITIVE	ADVANTAGES.
In	April	2014,	McKinsey	&	Company	published	a	report	entitled	“Grow	fast	or
die	slow,”	which	analyzed	the	life	cycles	of	three	thousand	software	and	Internet
companies,	and	found	that	positive	feedback	loops	made	rapid	growth	the	key
factor	in	financial	success:
First,	growth	yields	greater	returns.	High-growth	companies	offer	a
return	 to	 shareholders	 five	 times	 greater	 than	 medium-growth
companies.	 Second,	 growth	 predicts	 long-term	 success.
“Supergrowers”—companies	 whose	 growth	 was	 greater	 than
60	 percent	 when	 they	 reached	 $100	 million	 in	 revenues—were
eight	times	more	likely	to	reach	$1	billion	in	revenues	than	those
growing	less	than	20	percent.
We	believe	that	the	mechanism	behind	the	power	of	blitzscaling	is	“first-
scaler	advantage.”	Once	a	scale-up	occupies	the	high	ground	in	its	ecosystem,
the	networks	around	it	recognize	its	leadership,	and	both	talent	and	capital	flood
in.
For	one,	top	professionals	understand	that	they	can	have	a	greater	impact
working	for	the	market	leader.	Meanwhile,	joining	a	scale-up	that	is	clearly	a
“rocket	ship”	offers	many	of	the	financial	rewards	of	working	for	an	early-stage
start-up,	with	far	more	certainty	and	far	less	risk.	Scale-up	employees	are	paid
market	salaries,	receive	equity	upside,	and	have	a	very	good	chance	of	becoming
rich,	if	not	filthy	rich.	By	attracting	the	best	people,	scale-ups	increase	their
ability	to	build	and	bring	to	market	great	products,	which	in	turn	increases	their
ability	to	rapidly	scale.
A	 parallel	 calculus	 applies	 to	 investors.	 Venture	 capitalists	 (VCs)	 make
investment	 decisions	 based	 on	 the	 confidence	 interval	 they	 have	 in	 their
investment	thesis.	Achieving	scale	shrinks	those	intervals	and	makes	it	easier	to
decide	to	invest.	And	because	the	network	that	connects	investors—especially
within	 a	 tight-knit	 ecosystem	 like	 Silicon	 Valley—can	 disseminate	 this
information	quickly	and	broadly,	a	blitzscaling	company	can	raise	capital	on	a
massive	scale.	This	capital	infusion	can	fuel	explosive	growth,	which	shrinks	the
confidence	intervals	even	further.
Paradoxically,	 globalization	 has	 both	 leveled	 the	 playing	 field	 for
entrepreneurs	around	the	world	and	increased	the	value	of	being	in	a	premier
scaling	hub	like	Silicon	Valley	or	China.	Because	the	rest	of	the	world	believes
that	these	ecosystems	have	an	advantage	in	scaling	up	start-ups,	those	start-ups
and	their	investors	attract	capital	(human	and	financial)	from	all	over	the	world,
further	bolstering	their	ability	to	keep	growing.	This	is	a	key	reason	why	scale-
ups	like	Uber	and	Pinterest	have	achieved	a	scale	and	valuation	that	dwarf	those
of	most	publicly	traded	companies.	Due	to	my	role	at	Greylock	Partners,	I	can’t
comment	on	the	valuations	of	Dropbox	and	Airbnb,	but	they	occupy	a	similar
place	in	the	ecosystem.
Consider	the	case	of	two	very	similar	companies,	Twitter	and	Tumblr.	Both
had	brilliant,	product-oriented	founders	in	Evan	“Ev”	Williams	and	David	Karp.
Both	 were	 hot	 social	 media	 start-ups.	 Both	 grew	 at	 a	 remarkable	 rate	 after
establishing	product/market	fit.	Both	had	a	major	impact	on	popular	culture.	Yet
Twitter	went	public	and	achieved	a	market	capitalization	that	peaked	at	nearly
$37	billion,	while	Tumblr	was	acquired	by	Yahoo!—another	start-up	that	used
blitzscaling	to	become	a	scale-up,	only	to	decline	and	fade	away—for	“only”
$1	billion.
Was	this	dumb	luck	on	Twitter’s	side?	Perhaps.	Luck	always	plays	a	larger
role	than	founders,	investors,	and	the	media	would	like	to	admit.	But	a	major
difference	was	that	Twitter	could	draw	on	numerous	networks	for	advice	and
help	that	Tumblr	could	not.	For	example,	Twitter	was	able	to	bring	in	Dick
Costolo,	a	savvy	executive	with	prior	scaling	experience	at	Google.	In	contrast,
even	though	Tumblr	was	arguably	the	most	prominent	start-up	in	its	New	York
City	ecosystem,	it	couldn’t	easily	draw	upon	a	pool	of	local	talent	who	had
experience	dealing	with	rapid	growth.	According	to	Greylock’s	John	Lilly,	for
every	executive	role	that	Tumblr	needed	to	fill,	there	were	less	than	a	handful	of
candidates	in	all	of	New	York	City.	This	paucity	of	talent	made	hiring	difficult;
the	company	was	reluctant	to	replace	existing	employees	due	to	a	lack	of	better
alternatives.	Without	the	ability	to	hire	an	executive	team	that	could	blitzscale,
Tumblr	decided	to	sell	the	company.
Of	 course,	 while	 geography	 can	 present	 challenges	 to	 blitzscaling,	 they
become	much	more	solvable	if	you’re	aware	of	them.	For	example,	over	the	past
decade,	 Priceline—the	 world’s	 most	 successful	 online	 travel	 company—has
been	able	to	blitzscale	from	its	headquarters	in	Connecticut.	The	CEO	who	led
Priceline	 during	 its	 growth	 phase,	 Jeffery	 Boyd,	 saw	 advantages	 to	 this
geographic	isolation,	noting	that	the	company’s	location	meant	that	it	faced
fewer	bidding	 wars	 for	 the	 key	software	 engineers	 and	 designers	 needed	 to
support	the	rapid	growth	of	the	business.
It’s	extremely	difficult	for	later	entrants	to	compete	directly	with	a	blitzscaling
company	that	has	first-scaler	advantage.	Unless	these	players	find	a	different
game	in	which	they	can	capture	this	advantage,	they’ll	simply	become	irrelevant.
3.	DESPITE	ITS	INCREDIBLE	ADVANTAGES	AND	POTENTIAL
PAYOFFS,	BLITZSCALING	ALSO	COMES	WITH	MASSIVE	RISKS.
Until	recently,	“Move	fast	and	break	things”	was	Facebook’s	famous	motto.	Yet
rapid	 growth	 can	 cause	 nearly	 as	 many	 problems	 as	 it	 solves.	 As	 Mark
Zuckerberg	told	me	in	an	interview	for	my	Masters	of	Scale	podcast,	“We	got	to
a	point	where	it	was	taking	us	more	time	to	go	back	and	fix	the	bugs	and	issues
that	we’re	creating	than	the	speed	that	we	were	gaining	by	going	faster.”	In	one
famous	incident,	a	summer	intern	introduced	a	bug	that	brought	down	the	entire
Facebook	site	for	thirty	minutes.
There	 is	 a	 scientific	 term	 for	 out-of-control	 growth	 in	 the	 human	 body:
“cancer.”	In	this	context,	uncontrolled	growth	is	clearly	undesirable.	The	same	is
true	for	a	business.	Successful	blitzscaling	means	that	you’re	maintaining	at	least
some	level	of	control	by	rapidly	fixing	the	things	that	will	inevitably	get	broken
so	 that	 the	 company	 can	 maintain	 its	 furious	 pace	 without	 flaming	 out	 or
collapsing	in	on	itself.	Like	an	American	football	player	streaking	down	the	field
for	a	game-winning	touchdown,	even	a	company	that	has	achieved	first-scaler
advantage	can	lose	the	ball	prior	to	crossing	the	goal	line	if	it	takes	on	a	bigger
risk	than	it	can	handle.
Blitzscaling	is	risky	from	a	management	perspective	as	well.	Reinventing
your	leadership	style,	your	product,	and	your	organization	at	every	new	phase	of
scale	won’t	be	easy,	but	it	is	necessary.	In	the	words	of	leadership	guru	Marshall
Goldsmith,	“What	got	you	here	won’t	get	you	there.”
Market	 share	 and	 revenue	 growth	 earn	 headlines,	 but	 you	 can’t	 achieve
customer	and	revenue	scale	without	scaling	up	your	organization,	in	terms	of	the
size	and	scope	of	your	staff,	as	well	as	your	financial,	product,	and	technology
strategy.	 If	 the	 organization	 doesn’t	 grow	 in	 lockstep	 with	 its	 revenues	 and
customer	base,	things	can	quickly	spiral	out	of	control.
For	example,	during	a	period	of	blitzscaling	in	the	late	1980s	and	early	1990s,
Oracle	 Corporation	 focused	 so	 single-mindedly	 on	 sales	 growth	 that	 its
organization	lagged	badly	on	both	technology	(where	it	fell	behind	archrival
Sybase’s)	 and	 finance	 and	 nearly	 went	 bankrupt	 as	 a	 result.	 It	 took	 the
turnaround	 efforts	 of	 Ray	 Lane	 and	 Jeff	 Henley	 to	 stave	 off	 disaster	 and
reposition	Oracle	for	its	later	success.
Blitzscaling	your	organization	will	require	hard	choices	and	sacrifices;	for
example,	the	people	who	are	adept	at	launching	a	company	aren’t	necessarily
going	 to	 be	 the	 right	 people	 to	 scale	 it,	 as	 the	 Oracle	 example	 above
demonstrates.	 Later	 in	 the	 book	 we’ll	 discuss	 how	 successful	 blitzscalers
consciously	manage	growth	rather	than	letting	it	manage	them.
THE	FIVE	STAGES	OF	BLITZSCALING
Blitzscaling	a	start-up	isn’t	a	linear	process;	a	global	giant	isn’t	simply	a	start-up
that’s	been	multiplied	by	one	thousand,	working	out	of	a	gleaming	high-rise
headquarters	 instead	 of	 a	 grimy	 garage.	 Each	 major	 increment	 of	 growth
represents	 a	 qualitative	 as	 well	 as	 quantitative	 change.	 Drew	 Houston	 of
Dropbox	expressed	this	well	when	he	told	me,	“The	chessboard	keeps	adding
new	pieces	and	new	dimensions	over	time.”
In	 the	 physical	 sciences,	 materials	 often	 undergo	 phase	 changes	 as	 their
circumstances	 (e.g.,	 temperature	 and	 pressure)	 change.	 Ice	 melts	 into	 water;
water	boils	into	steam.	As	a	start-up	scales	up	from	one	phase	to	the	next,	it
undergoes	fundamental	changes	as	well.
And	in	the	same	way	that	ice	skates	are	useless	on	water,	and	you	can’t	skip
rocks	on	water	vapor,	the	approaches	and	processes	that	worked	for	one	phase
break	down	once	the	scale-up	reaches	the	next	phase.
This	book	is	designed	to	help	you	successfully	navigate	the	phase	changes
you’ll	face	on	the	path	to	global	dominance.
Throughout	this	book,	we	will	refer	to	the	five	key	stages	of	blitzscaling	using
the	metaphor	of	a	community.	Since	the	most	obvious,	visible,	and	impactful
change	in	a	scale-up	is	the	number	of	people	it	employs,	we’ll	define	the	stages
based	on	the	number	of	employees	in	the	company,	or	its	organizational	scale.
THE	FIVE	STAGES	OF	BLITZSCALING
	
Stage	1	(Family) 1–9	employees
Stage	2	(Tribe) 10s	of	employees
Stage	3	(Village) 100s	of	employees
Stage	4	(City) 1000s	of	employees
Stage	5	(Nation) 10000s	of	employees
Each	 stage	 has	 critical	 differences	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 management	 and
leadership.	When	you’re	head	of	a	nuclear	Family,	you	have	close	relationships
with	all	of	your	Family	members.	When	you’re	the	head	of	a	whole	Nation,
you’re	responsible	for	the	lives	of	a	multitude	of	people,	most	of	whom	you’ll
never	meet.	(Later	in	the	book	we’ll	talk	about	how	to	optimize	your	people
management	strategy	as	your	company	grows.)
It’s	important	to	remember	that	while	these	powers	of	ten	provide	a	clear	and
consistent	set	of	categories,	real	life	is	often	messier.	For	example,	a	start-up
with	a	tight-knit	team	might	feel	and	act	like	a	Family	even	if	it	has	nearly
twenty	employees.	So	these	definitions	are	meant	simply	to	offer	a	useful	set	of
guidelines.
We	 also	 recognize	 that	 the	 number	 of	 employees	 is	 only	 one	 of	 several
measures	of	an	organization’s	scale.	Some	of	the	other	measures	of	scale	include
the	number	of	users	(user	scale),	the	number	of	customers	(customer	scale),	and
total	annual	revenues	(business	scale).	These	measures	usually,	but	don’t	always,
move	in	lockstep.	While	it’s	nearly	impossible	to	achieve	customer	scale	or
business	scale	without	organizational	scale—customers	require	customer	service
representatives,	 and	 revenues	 typically	 require	 salespeople—it	 is	 possible	 to
achieve	 user	 scale	 without	 organizational	 scale.	 Consider	 the	 example	 of
Instagram:	when	that	company	was	acquired	by	Facebook	for	$1	billion,	it	had
over	one	hundred	million	users	but	just	thirteen	employees	and	no	significant
revenues.
The	 fact	 that	 the	 phases	 don’t	 always	 move	 in	 lockstep	 is	 a	 feature	 of
blitzscaling,	not	a	bug.	As	we’ll	discuss,	operational	scalability	is	one	of	the
primary	growth	limiters	that	scale-ups	need	to	address.	When	a	business	can
grow	 users,	 customers,	 and	 revenues	 faster	 than	 the	 number	 of	 employees
without	collapsing	under	the	weight	of	its	own	growth,	the	business	can	achieve
greater	profitability	and	keep	growing	without	being	as	tightly	constrained	by
the	 need	 for	 financial	 or	 human	 capital.	 In	 contrast,	 when	 the	 number	 of
employees	grows	faster	than	users,	customers,	and	revenues,	it’s	a	major	red	flag
that	could	indicate	issues	with	the	fundamental	business	model.
Nevertheless,	for	the	sake	of	simplicity,	this	book	will	typically	define	the
stage	of	a	company	by	its	organizational	scale.	A	Family-stage	company	will
have	one	to	nine	employees,	a	Tribe-stage	company	will	have	ten	to	ninety-nine
employees,	and	so	on.	When	exceptions	arise,	we’ll	specifically	call	them	out	to
avoid	confusion.
THE	THREE	KEY	TECHNIQUES	OF	BLITZSCALING
Through	much	study	of,	direct	access	to,	and	conversation	with	the	leadership	at
companies	 such	 as	 Google,	 Amazon,	 and	 Facebook—and	 through	 my	 own
experiences	as	an	entrepreneur	and	an	investor—we’ve	been	able	to	identify	the
three	key	techniques	applied	by	entrepreneurs	and	investors	to	build	dominant
companies.	 These	 basic	 principles	 do	 not	 depend	 on	 geography	 and	 can	 be
adapted	to	build	great	companies	in	any	ecosystem,	albeit	with	varying	degrees
of	difficulty.
TECHNIQUE	#1:	BUSINESS	MODEL	INNOVATION
The	first	technique	of	blitzscaling	is	to	design	an	innovative	business	model	that
can	 truly	 grow.	 This	 sounds	 like	 a	 Start-ups	 101–level	 insight,	 but	 it’s
astounding	how	many	founders	miss	this	key	element.	A	major	mistake	made	by
many	start-ups	around	the	world	is	focusing	on	the	technology,	the	software,	the
product,	and	the	design,	but	neglecting	to	ever	figure	out	the	business.	And	by
“business”	we	simply	mean	how	the	company	makes	money	by	acquiring	and
serving	 its	 customers.	 In	 contrast,	 despite	 the	 popular	 “engineers	 are	 gods”
narrative	prevalent	in	Silicon	Valley,	the	companies	and	founders	we	universally
hail	as	geniuses	aren’t	just	technology	nerds—they’re	almost	always	business
nerds	too.	At	Google,	Larry	Page	and	Sergey	Brin	built	great	search	algorithms,
but	it	was	their	innovations	to	the	search	engine	business	model—specifically,
considering	relevance	and	performance	when	displaying	advertisements	rather
than	 simply	 renting	 space	 to	 the	 highest	 bidder—that	 drove	 their	 massive
success.
As	the	world	has	gone	digital,	business	model	innovation	has	become	even
more	important.	So	many	technologies	are	available	as	services,	which	are	on
demand	and	built	to	be	integrated,	that	technology	is	no	longer	as	strong	a
differentiator,	while	figuring	out	the	right	combinations	of	services	to	bring
together	into	a	breakthrough	product	has	become	a	major	differentiator.	Most	of
today’s	successful	companies	are	more	like	Tesla,	which	combines	a	set	of
technologies	that	already	existed,	rather	than	SpaceX,	which	had	to	pioneer	new
ones.
Business	model	innovation	is	how	start-ups	are	able	to	outcompete	established
competitors	who	typically	hold	a	host	of	advantages	over	any	upstarts.	As	a
start-up,	Dropbox	competes	with	giants	like	Microsoft	and	Google,	who	ought	to
have	 major	 advantages	 in	 technology,	 finance,	 and	 market	 power.	 Dropbox
founder	and	CEO	Drew	Houston	knows	that	his	company	can’t	simply	rely	on
better	technology	or	outexecuting	the	competition:	“If	your	playbook	is	the	same
as	your	competitor’s,	you	are	in	trouble,	because	chances	are	they	are	just	going
to	run	your	playbook	with	a	lot	more	resources!”
Drew	had	to	design	a	better	business	model,	in	which	the	focus	on	sharing
files	means	that	the	number	of	files	Dropbox	has	to	store	(or	in	the	past,	pay
Amazon	 to	 store)	 increases	 far	 more	 slowly	 than	 the	 value	 created	 for	 the
customer	and	thus	the	revenues	Dropbox	can	collect	from	those	customers.	Uber
and	 Airbnb	 also	 built	 large	 businesses	 at	 incredible	 speed	 based	 on	 novel
business	models	rather	than	unprecedented	new	technologies.	If	technological
innovation	alone	were	enough,	federal	research	labs	would	produce	$100	billion
companies	on	a	regular	basis.	Spoiler	alert:	they	don’t.
This	 is	 not	 to	 say	 that	 technology	 innovation	 is	 unimportant.	 Technology
innovation	is	the	most	common	trigger	for	launching	a	new	market	or	upending
an	existing	one.	Uber	wasn’t	the	first	company	to	try	to	improve	the	experience
of	hailing	a	taxi.	But	prior	to	the	technological	innovation	of	the	smartphone,
complete	 with	 wireless	 Internet	 connection	 and	 GPS-enabled	 location-based
services,	 Uber’s	 business	 model	 simply	 wouldn’t	 have	 worked.	 These
innovations	reduced	the	friction	for	both	driver	and	rider,	making	Uber’s	core
UberX	ridesharing	model	a	mass-market	possibility	for	the	first	time.
Nor	 can	 companies	 afford	 to	 ignore	 technology	 innovation	 after	 they
successfully	blitzscale	their	way	to	City	or	Nation	stage.	Each	and	every	one	of
the	 technology	 companies	 worth	 over	 $100	 billion	 has	 used	 technology
leadership	to	reinforce	its	competitive	advantages.	Amazon	may	have	started	as
a	simple	online	retailer	with	no	unique	technology,	but	today	its	technological
prowess	in	cloud	computing,	automated	logistics,	and	voice	recognition	help	to
maintain	its	dominance.	In	fact,	the	megacompanies	built	by	blitzscaling	are
often	 the	 ones	 buying	 the	 technology	 innovators,	 much	 as	 Google	 bought
DeepMind	and	Facebook	bought	Oculus.
Technology	innovation	is	a	key	factor	in	retaining	the	gains	produced	by
business	model	innovation.	After	all,	if	one	technology	innovation	can	create	a
new	market,	another	technology	innovation	can	render	it	obsolete,	seemingly
overnight.	While	Uber	has	achieved	massive	scale,	the	greatest	threat	to	its
future	doesn’t	come	in	the	form	of	direct	competitors	like	Didi	Chuxing,	though
these	 are	 formidable	 threats.	 The	 greatest	 threat	 to	 Uber’s	 business	 is	 the
technology	innovation	of	autonomous	vehicles,	which	could	make	obsolete	one
of	Uber’s	biggest	competitive	advantages—its	carefully	cultivated	network	of
drivers—essentially	overnight.
The	 key	 is	 to	 combine	 new	 technologies	 with	 effective	 distribution	 to
potential	customers,	a	scalable	and	high-margin	revenue	model,	and	an	approach
that	 allows	 you	 to	 serve	 those	 customers	 given	 your	 probable	 resource
constraints.
Ideally,	you	design	your	business	model	innovation	before	you	start	your
company.	This	is	what	happened	when	I	cofounded	LinkedIn.	The	key	business
model	 innovations	 for	 LinkedIn,	 including	 the	 two-way	 nature	 of	 the
relationships	 and	 filling	 professionals’	 need	 for	 a	 business-oriented	 online
identity,	didn’t	just	happen	organically.	They	were	the	result	of	much	thought
and	reflection,	and	I	drew	on	the	experiences	I	had	when	founding	SocialNet,
one	of	the	first	online	social	networks,	nearly	a	decade	before	the	creation	of
LinkedIn.	But	life	isn’t	always	so	neat.	Many	companies,	even	famous	and
successful	ones,	have	to	develop	their	business	model	innovation	after	they	have
already	commenced	operations.
PayPal	didn’t	have	a	business	model	when	it	began	operations	(I	was	a	key
member	 of	 the	 PayPal	 executive	 team).	 We	 were	 growing	 exponentially,	 at
5	percent	per	day,	and	we	were	losing	money	on	every	single	transaction	we
processed.	The	funny	thing	is	that	some	of	our	critics	called	us	insane	for	paying
customers	bonuses	to	refer	their	friends.	Those	referral	bonuses	were	actually
brilliant,	 because	 their	 cost	 was	 so	 much	 lower	 than	 the	 standard	 cost	 of
acquiring	new	financial	services	customers	via	advertising.	(We’ll	discuss	the
power	and	importance	of	this	kind	of	viral	marketing	later	on.)
The	insanity,	in	fact,	was	that	we	were	allowing	our	users	to	accept	credit	card
payments,	sticking	PayPal	with	the	cost	of	paying	3	percent	of	each	transaction
to	the	credit	card	processors,	while	charging	our	users	nothing.	I	remember	once
telling	my	old	college	friend	and	PayPal	cofounder/CEO	Peter	Thiel,	“Peter,	if
you	 and	 I	 were	 standing	 on	 the	 roof	 of	 our	 office	 and	 throwing	 stacks	 of
hundred-dollar	bills	off	the	edge	as	fast	as	our	arms	could	go,	we	still	wouldn’t
be	losing	money	as	quickly	as	we	are	right	now.”	We	ended	up	solving	the
problem	by	charging	businesses	to	accept	payments,	much	as	the	credit	card
processors	 did,	 but	 funding	 those	 payments	 using	 automated	 clearinghouse
(ACH)	bank	transactions,	which	cost	a	fraction	of	the	charges	associated	with
the	credit	card	networks.	But	if	we	had	waited	until	we	had	solved	this	problem
before	blitzscaling,	I	suspect	we	wouldn’t	have	become	the	market	leader.
TECHNIQUE	#2:	STRATEGY	INNOVATION
The	 most	 obvious	 element	 of	 blitzscaling	 is	 the	 pursuit	 of	 extreme	 growth,
which,	when	combined	with	an	innovative	business	model,	can	generate	massive
value	and	long-term	competitive	advantage.	Many	start-ups	believe	they	are
pursuing	a	strategy	of	extreme	growth,	when	in	fact	they	have	the	goal	and	the
wish	for	extreme	growth	but	no	understanding	of	an	actual	strategy	that	will	get
them	there.	To	achieve	your	goals,	you	have	to	know	what	you	plan	to	do	and,
just	as	important,	what	you	plan	not	to	do.	Also,	growth	doesn’t	create	value	in
and	of	itself;	for	that,	it	has	to	be	paired	with	a	working	business	model.	It’s	easy
to	achieve	extreme	customer	and	revenue	growth	if	your	company	sells	$20	bills
for	 $1,	 but	 “we’ll	 make	 it	 up	 in	 volume”	 won’t	 allow	 you	 to	 build	 any
sustainable	value.
For	successful	blitzscaling,	the	competitive	advantage	comes	from	the	growth
factors	built	into	the	business	model,	such	as	network	effects,	whereby	the	first
company	 to	 achieve	 critical	 scale	 triggers	 a	 feedback	 loop	 that	 allows	 it	 to
dominate	a	winner-take-all	or	winner-take-most	market	and	achieve	a	lasting
first-scaler	advantage.	For	example,	Uber’s	strategy	of	aggressive	city-by-city
expansion	 allows	 its	 customers	 to	 hail	 rides	 with	 fewer	 delays	 than	 its
competitors.	Uber	wants	you	to	be	able	to	get	a	ride	faster	with	Uber	than	with
anyone	else.	This	attracts	more	customers,	which	attracts	more	drivers,	which
increases	the	liquidity	of	the	marketplace,	which	allows	customers	to	hail	rides
even	 more	 quickly,	 which	 attracts	 more	 customers,	 and	 so	 on.	 Early	 Uber
investor	Bill	Gurley	laid	out	Uber’s	strategy	in	his	2012	blog	post	“All	Markets
Are	Not	Created	Equal.”
As	the	company	grows,	they	are	able	to	facilitate	more	cars	on	the
road,	 and	 along	 with	 their	 investment	 in	 route	 and	 load
optimization,	this	allows	for	shorter	and	shorter	pickup	times.	The
experience	gets	better	and	better	the	longer	they	are	in	the	market.
Blitzscaling	 goes	 beyond	 just	 a	 strategy	 of	 aggressive	 growth	 because	 it
involves	doing	things	that	don’t	make	sense	according	to	traditional	business
thinking,	 such	 as	 prioritizing	 speed	 over	 efficiency	 despite	 an	 uncertain
environment.	At	the	same	time,	blitzscaling	also	goes	beyond	just	risk	taking.	It
may	be	risky	to	bet	the	company,	as	Walt	Disney	did	when	he	borrowed	against
his	own	life	insurance	to	build	Disneyland,	but	it’s	not	blitzscaling.	Blitzscaling
would	 have	 involved	 inefficiencies	 like	 paying	 construction	 crews	 to	 work
twenty-four	hours	a	day	in	order	to	get	Disneyland	open	a	few	months	earlier,	or
reducing	ticket	prices	90	percent	to	get	to	one	million	visitors	faster—knowing
that	those	one	million	visitors	were	networked	to	ten	million	more.
Here	is	one	of	the	ruthless	practices	that	has	helped	make	Silicon	Valley	so
successful:	Investors	will	look	at	a	company	that	is	on	an	upward	trajectory	but
doesn’t	display	the	proverbial	hockey	stick	of	exponential	growth	and	conclude
that	they	need	to	either	sell	the	business	or	take	on	additional	risk	that	might
increase	the	chances	of	achieving	exponential	growth.	Achieving	20	percent
annual	growth,	which	would	delight	Wall	Street	analysts	covering	any	other
industry,	simply	isn’t	enough	to	transform	a	start-up	into	a	multibillion-dollar
company	fast	enough.	Silicon	Valley	venture	capitalists	want	entrepreneurs	to
pursue	exponential	growth	even	if	doing	so	costs	more	money	and	increases	the
chances	that	the	business	could	fail,	resulting	in	a	bigger	loss.	Dropping	below
even	40	percent	annual	growth	is	a	warning	sign	for	investors.
This	mindset	can	be	difficult	for	people	to	understand.	“Why	should	I	risk	it
all	and	potentially	blow	up	what	is	a	successful,	growing	business?”	they	might
rightfully	ask.	The	answer	is	that	blitzscaling	businesses	tend	to	play	in	winner-
take-most	or	winner-take-all	markets.	The	greater	risk	for	a	successful,	growing
business	 is	 to	 move	 too	 slowly	 and	 allow	 its	 competitors	 to	 win	 market
leadership	and	first-scaler	advantage.
Nokia	is	a	great	example	of	the	cost	of	caution.	In	2007,	Nokia	was	the
world’s	largest	and	most	successful	maker	of	mobile	phones,	with	a	market
capitalization	of	just	under	$99	billion.	Then	Apple	and	Samsung	came	blazing
into	the	market.	In	2013,	Nokia	sold	its	money-losing	handset	operations	to
Microsoft	for	$7	billion,	and	in	2016	Microsoft	sold	its	feature	phone	assets	and
the	Nokia	handset	brand	to	Foxconn	and	HMD	for	just	$350	million.	That’s	a
drop	 in	 value	 for	 Nokia’s	 mobile	 phone	 business	 from	 somewhere	 in	 the
neighborhood	of	$99	billion	to	$350	million	in	less	than	a	decade—a	decline	of
over	99	percent.
At	 the	 time,	 Nokia’s	 decisions	 may	 have	 seemed	 to	 make	 sense.	 Nokia
actually	continued	growing	even	after	the	launch	of	the	iPhone	and	Google’s
Android	operating	system.	Nokia	hit	its	peak	in	terms	of	unit	volume	when	it
shipped	104	million	phones	in	2010.	But	Nokia’s	sales	declined	after	that,	and
were	surpassed	by	Android	in	2011	and	iPhone	in	2012.	By	the	time	Nokia’s
management	realized	the	existential	threat	facing	them,	it	was	too	late;	even	the
desperation	play	of	aligning	themselves	with	Microsoft	as	its	exclusive	Windows
Phone	partner	couldn’t	reverse	the	decline.
Because	blitzscaling	often	requires	spending	significant	amounts	of	capital	in
ways	that	traditional	business	wisdom	would	consider	“wasteful,”	implementing
a	financial	strategy	that	supports	this	aggressive	spending	is	a	critical	part	of
blitzscaling.	For	example,	Uber	often	uses	heavy	subsidies	on	both	sides	of	the
marketplace	when	it	launches	in	a	new	city,	lowering	fares	to	attract	riders	and
boosting	payments	to	attract	drivers.	By	paying	out	more	than	it	takes	in	on
those	 early	 trips,	 Uber	 is	 able	 to	 reach	 critical	 scale	 faster	 than	 a	 more
conservative	competitor.	Given	the	winner-take-most	nature	of	the	ridesharing
market,	that	“wasteful”	spending	has	helped	Uber	achieve	a	dominant	market
position	in	the	cities	in	which	it	operates.	Of	course,	that	strategy	isn’t	possible
without	the	ability	to	raise	massive	amounts	of	capital	on	favorable	terms.	In
Uber’s	case,	it	has	been	able	to	raise	nearly	$9	billion	between	its	founding	and
the	writing	of	this	book.	At	some	point,	Uber	will	have	to	demonstrate	the	ability
to	significantly	improve	its	unit	economics,	or	its	investors	will	get	very	grumpy.
This	 concern	 helps	 explain	 Uber’s	 significant	 investments	 in	 autonomous
vehicle	technology,	which	could	eliminate	its	biggest	expense—driver	payments
—in	one	fell	swoop.
The	willingness	to	take	on	the	risks	of	blitzscaling	is	one	of	the	major	reasons
why	Silicon	Valley	has	produced	such	a	disproportionate	share	of	blockbuster
companies	in	comparison	to	other	geographies.	To	be	fair,	it	has	also	produced	a
disproportionate	 share	 of	 financial	 disasters—hence	 the	 word	 “risk”	 when
talking	about	blitzscaling.	But	as	the	rise	of	juggernauts	like	Alibaba	and	Spotify
illustrates,	blitzscaling	is	also	starting	to	take	off	around	the	world.
TECHNIQUE	#3:	MANAGEMENT	INNOVATION
The	final	technique	required	for	blitzscaling	is	management	innovation.	This	is
necessary	 because	 of	 the	 extreme	 strains	 placed	 on	 the	 organization	 and	 its
employees	by	hypergrowth.
I	am	fond	of	pointing	out	to	entrepreneurs	and	executives	that	“in	theory,	you
don’t	need	practice.”
What	I	mean	is	that	no	matter	how	brilliant	your	business	model	and	growth
strategy,	 you	 won’t	 be	 able	 to	 build	 a	 real-world	 (i.e.,	 non-theoretical)
blockbuster	company	without	a	lot	of	practice.	But	that	problem	is	magnified
when	you’re	trying	to	blitzscale.
The	kind	of	growth	involved	in	blitzscaling	typically	means	major	human
resources	 challenges.	 Tripling	 the	 number	 of	 employees	 each	 year	 isn’t
uncommon	 for	 a	 blitzscaling	 company.	 This	 requires	 a	 radically	 different
approach	to	management	than	that	of	a	typical	growth	company,	which	would	be
happy	to	grow	15	percent	per	year	and	can	take	time	finding	a	few	perfect	hires
and	obsessing	about	corporate	culture.	As	we	will	discuss	in	more	detail	later	in
the	 book,	 companies	 that	 blitzscale	 have	 to	 rapidly	 navigate	 a	 set	 of	 key
transitions	as	their	organizations	grow,	and	have	to	embrace	counterintuitive
rules	 like	 hiring	 “good	 enough”	 people,	 launching	 flawed	 and	 imperfect
products,	letting	fires	burn,	and	ignoring	angry	customers.
Over	the	course	of	this	book,	we’ll	see	how	business	model,	growth	strategy,
and	management	innovation	work	together	to	form	the	high-risk,	high-reward
process	of	blitzscaling.
PART	II
Business	Model	Innovation
Of	the	three	core	techniques	of	blitzscaling,	the	first	and	most	foundational	is	to
design	an	innovative	business	model	capable	of	exponential	growth.
The	story	of	entrepreneurship	in	the	Internet	era	is	a	story	of	this	kind	of
business	model	innovation.
Think	back	to	the	dot-com	era,	which	stretched	roughly	from	the	IPO	of
Netscape	in	1995	until	the	NASDAQ	began	to	crash	in	2000.	During	this	period,
enormous	numbers	of	start-ups	and	pretty	much	every	established	company	tried
to	build	great	Internet	businesses,	yet	nearly	all	of	them	failed.	The	problem	was,
most	of	them	simply	tried	to	cut	and	paste	existing	business	models	onto	the	new
online	medium.	You	can’t	transplant	a	heart	from	one	species	into	another	and
expect	it	to	thrive.
If	you	had	asked	stock	market	analysts	in	1995	which	companies	were	best
positioned	to	dominate	the	Internet,	most	would	have	pointed	to	existing	giants
like	Microsoft	and	Time	Warner,	which	invested	millions	in	Internet	businesses
like	MSN	and	Pathfinder.	Others	would	have	mentioned	“pure	play”	dot-com
start-ups	like	eToys,	which	combined	proven	business	models	like	the	“category
killer”	store	with	the	new	online	medium.
Yet	when	the	wreckage	of	the	dot-com	crash	cleared,	the	most	successful
companies	 still	 charging	 full	 steam	 ahead	 were	 the	 few	 start-ups	 that	 were
designed	 around	 totally	 new	 business	 models,	 such	 as	 Amazon,	 eBay,	 and
Google.
Walmart	 should	 have	 dominated	 online	 retail,	 yet	 Amazon	 emerged	 and
practically	 wrote	 the	 bible	 for	 e-commerce,	 including	 consumer	 reviews,
shopping	 carts,	 and	 free	 shipping.	 Newspapers	 and	 phone	 book	 companies
should	have	been	able	to	transfer	their	information	businesses	to	the	online
world,	but	Yahoo!	and	then	Google	stepped	up	to	the	plate.	They	built	the	search
engines	 that	 indexed	 the	 world’s	 information,	 and	 Google	 developed	 the
business	model	that	made	it	worth	more	than	all	traditional	media	companies
combined.
In	 contrast,	 and	 much	 to	 their	 misfortune,	 start-ups	 that	 relied	 purely	 on
technology	innovation	without	any	real	business	model	innovation	largely	went
bust.	Companies	like	eToys	that	tried	to	“Amazon”	various	markets,	but	without
Amazon’s	 front-	 and	 back-office	 innovations,	 crashed	 and	 burned	 once	 the
financial	markets	began	to	demand	profits	rather	than	just	expensive	revenue
growth.	 Even	 Netscape,	 whose	 Netscape	 Navigator	 mainstreamed	 Web
browsing,	and	whose	IPO	kicked	off	the	dot-com	boom,	was	forced	to	sell	itself
off	to	AOL.	Netscape	engineers	invented	JavaScript,	SSL,	and	all	kinds	of	cool
technology	for	the	Internet	that	are	still	used	today,	but	Netscape	accepted	the
status	quo	when	it	came	to	using	tried-and-true	business	models	rather	than
developing	 new	 ones	 that	 were	 enabled	 by	 its	 own	 technology	 innovation.
Unfortunately	for	Netscape,	its	competitor	Microsoft	already	understood	those
business	models	all	too	well	and	knew	exactly	how	to	use	its	economic	might
and	 resources	 to	 pull	 their	 levers.	 In	 the	 first	 “browser	 war,”	 Microsoft
preinstalled	its	Internet	Explorer	on	all	new	Windows	computers,	then	gave
away	 its	 Web	 server	 software,	 Internet	 Information	 Server	 (IIS),	 which
effectively	destroyed	Netscape’s	business	model.
Could	Netscape	have	succeeded	with	a	different	strategy?	We	believe	so.
Consider	that	one	of	the	ways	that	Netscape	monetized	its	Navigator	browser
was	to	sell	the	sponsorship	of	its	Net	Search	button	to	the	Excite	search	engine
for	$5	million.	Netscape	believed	that	the	browser	itself	was	the	key,	while
search	 was	 simply	 a	 sideline.	 It	 was	 left	 to	 two	 pairs	 of	 Stanford	 graduate
students,	Jerry	Yang	and	David	Filo	(Yahoo!)	and	Larry	Page	and	Sergey	Brin
(Google),	to	prove	that	search	was	a	much	bigger	business.	Google’s	innovative
model	of	selling	text	ads	next	to	search	results	via	an	automated	marketplace
allowed	it	to	build	a	franchise	so	dominant	that	it	later	withstood	a	series	of
frontal	assaults	by	Microsoft,	including	a	marketing	program	in	which	Microsoft
essentially	paid	people	to	use	its	Bing	search	engine.
The	same	story	has	been	repeated	in	multiple	waves	since.	Facebook	and
LinkedIn	dominate	social	networks	even	though	AOL,	Microsoft	(Hotmail),	and
Yahoo!	(Yahoo!	Mail)	controlled	most	consumer	online	identities	when	those
social	networks	first	emerged.	Alibaba	beat	eBay	in	China.	Uber	outflanked	the
taxi	companies.	Airbnb	has	more	room	listings	than	any	hotel	company	in	the
world.
These	success	stories	are	technology	companies,	sure.	But	as	we’ve	seen,
technological	 innovation	 alone	 is	 insufficient—even	 when	 its	 impact	 on	 the
future	 is	 huge.	 Services	 like	 Craigslist,	 Wikipedia,	 and	 IMDb	 (the	 Internet
Movie	Database)	were	early,	influential	Internet	innovators,	but	they	still	never
became	massively	(financially)	valuable	on	their	own.
The	real	value	creation	comes	when	innovative	technology	enables	innovative
products	 and	 services	 with	 innovative	 business	 models.	 Even	 though	 the
business	models	of	Google,	Alibaba,	and	Facebook	might	seem	obvious—even
inevitable—after	 the	 fact,	 they	 weren’t	 widely	 appreciated	 at	 the	 time	 they
launched.	How	many	people	in	1999	would	have	realized	that	running	tiny	text
ads	next	to	the	equivalent	of	an	electronic	card	catalog	would	lead	to	the	world’s
most	valuable	software	company?	Or	that	setting	up	an	online	shopping	mall	for
China’s	emerging	middle	class	would	lead	to	a	$100	billion	business?	Which	of
you	in	2004	would	have	predicted	that	letting	people	see	what	their	friends	are
talking	about	by	staring	at	a	tiny	screen	on	a	handheld	computer	would	become
the	dominant	form	of	media?	Great	companies	and	great	businesses	often	seem
to	be	bad	ideas	when	they	first	appear	because	business	model	innovations—by
their	very	definition—can’t	point	to	a	proven	business	model	to	demonstrate
why	they’ll	work.
To	really	understand	why	these	business	models	succeed,	we	need	to	clearly
define	what	we	mean	by	“business	model”	in	the	first	place.	Part	of	the	problem
is	 that	 the	 term	 can	 be	 interpreted	 in	 so	 many	 different	 ways.	 The	 great
management	thinker	Peter	Drucker	wrote	that	business	models	are	essentially
theories	 composed	 of	 assumptions	 about	 the	 business,	 which	 circumstances
might	 require	 to	 change	 over	 time.	 Harvard	 Business	 School	 professor	 and
author	Clay	Christensen	believes	that	you	need	to	focus	on	the	concept	of	the
“job-to-be-done”;	that	is,	when	a	customer	buys	a	product,	she	is	“hiring”	it	to
do	a	particular	job.	Then	there’s	Brian	Chesky	of	Airbnb,	who	said	simply,
“Build	a	product	people	love.	Hire	amazing	people.	What	else	is	there	to	do?
Everything	else	is	fake	work.”
As	Andrea	Ovans	aptly	put	it	in	her	January	2015	Harvard	Business	Review
article,	“What	Is	a	Business	Model?”,	it’s	enough	to	make	your	head	swim!	For
the	purposes	of	this	book,	we’ll	focus	on	the	basic	definition:	a	company’s
business	 model	 describes	 how	 it	 generates	 financial	 returns	 by	 producing,
selling,	and	supporting	its	products.
What	sets	companies	like	Amazon,	Google,	and	Facebook	apart,	even	from
other	successful	high-tech	companies,	is	that	they	have	consistently	been	able	to
design	 and	 execute	 business	 models	 with	 characteristics	 that	 allow	 them	 to
quickly	achieve	massive	scale	and	sustainable	competitive	advantage.	Of	course,
there	isn’t	a	single	perfect	business	model	that	works	for	every	company,	and
trying	to	find	one	is	a	waste	of	time.	But	most	great	business	models	have	certain
characteristics	in	common.	If	you	want	to	find	your	best	business	model,	you
should	try	to	design	one	that	maximizes	four	key	growth	factors	and	minimizes
two	key	growth	limiters.
DESIGNING	TO	MAXIMIZE	GROWTH:	THE	FOUR	GROWTH
FACTORS
GROWTH	FACTOR	#1:	MARKET	SIZE
The	most	basic	growth	factor	to	consider	for	your	business	model	is	market	size.
This	focus	on	market	size	may	sound	obvious,	and	it’s	right	out	of	Pitch	Deck
101	for	start-ups,	but	if	you	want	to	build	a	massive	company,	you	need	to	begin
with	the	basics	and	eliminate	ideas	that	serve	too	small	of	a	market.
A	big	market	has	both	a	large	number	of	potential	customers	and	a	variety	of
efficient	channels	for	reaching	those	customers.	That	last	point	is	important;	a
market	consisting	of	“everyone	in	the	world”	might	seem	large,	but	it	isn’t
reachable	in	any	efficient	way.	We’ll	discuss	this	in	greater	depth	when	we	look
at	distribution	as	a	key	growth	factor.
It’s	not	easy	to	judge	the	size	of	a	market,	or	what	pitch	decks	and	venture
capitalists	often	refer	to	as	TAM	(total	available	market).	Predicting	TAM	and
how	it	will	grow	in	the	future	is	one	of	the	main	sources	of	uncertainty	in
blitzscaling.	But	predicting	it	correctly	and	investing	accordingly	when	others
are	still	paralyzed	by	fear	is	also	one	of	the	main	opportunities	for	unexpectedly
high	returns,	as	we’ll	see	in	the	cases	of	Airbnb	and	Uber.
Ideally,	the	market	itself	is	also	growing	quickly,	which	can	make	a	smaller
market	attractive	and	a	large	market	irresistible.
In	Silicon	Valley,	the	competition	for	venture	capital	exerts	a	strong	pressure
on	entrepreneurs	to	focus	on	ideas	that	are	going	after	big	markets.	Venture
capital	firms	might	raise	hundreds	of	millions	or	even	billions	of	dollars	from
their	investors—limited	partners	like	pension	funds	and	university	endowments
—who	are	seeking	above-market	returns	to	compensate	them	for	taking	a	chance
on	privately	held	companies	rather	than	simply	investing	in	the	Coca-Colas	of
the	world.	To	deliver	these	above-market	returns,	venture	capital	funds	need	to
at	least	triple	their	investors’	money.	A	$100	million	venture	capital	fund	would
need	to	return	$300	million	over	the	typical	seven-	to	ten-year	life	of	a	fund	to
achieve	an	above-market	internal	rate	of	return	of	15	to	22	percent.	A	$1	billion
fund	would	need	to	return	$3	billion.	Since	most	venture	capital	investments
either	 lose	 money	 or	 barely	 break	 even,	 the	 only	 realistic	 way	 that	 venture
capitalists	can	achieve	these	aggressive	goals	is	to	rely	on	a	small	number	of
incredibly	 successful	 investments.	 For	 example,	 Benchmark	 Capital	 invested
$6.7	million	in	eBay	in	1997.	Less	than	two	years	later,	eBay	went	public,	and
Benchmark’s	 stake	 was	 worth	 $5	 billion,	 which	 is	 a	 745	 times	 return.	 The
specific	fund	that	made	that	investment,	Benchmark	Capital	Partners	I,	took
$85	million	from	investors	and	returned	$7.8	billion,	for	a	92	times	return.	(The
initial	investors	in	Facebook	did	even	better,	but	were	individuals	rather	than
firms.)
Given	 the	 desire	 for	 home	 runs	 like	 eBay,	 most	 venture	 capitalists	 filter
investment	 opportunities	 based	 on	 market	 size.	 If	 a	 company	 can’t	 achieve
“venture	scale”	(generally,	a	market	of	at	least	$1	billion	in	annual	sales),	then
most	VCs	won’t	invest,	even	if	it	is	a	good	business.	It	simply	isn’t	large	enough
to	 help	 them	 achieve	 their	 goal	 of	 returning	 more	 than	 three	 times	 their
investors’	money.
When	Brian	Chesky	was	pitching	venture	capitalists	to	invest	in	Airbnb,	one
of	the	people	he	consulted	was	the	entrepreneur	and	investor	Sam	Altman,	who
later	became	the	president	of	the	Y	Combinator	start-up	accelerator.	Altman	saw
Chesky’s	pitch	deck	and	told	him	it	was	perfect,	except	that	he	needed	to	change
the	market-size	slide	from	a	modest	$30	million	to	$30	billion.	“Investors	want
B’s,	baby,”	Altman	told	Chesky.	Of	course,	Altman	wasn’t	telling	Chesky	to	lie;
rather,	he	argued	that	if	the	Airbnb	team	truly	believed	in	their	own	assumptions,
$30	million	was	a	gross	underestimate,	and	they	should	use	a	number	that	was
true	to	their	convictions.	As	it	turns	out,	Airbnb’s	market	was	indeed	closer	to
$30	billion.
When	evaluating	market	size,	it’s	also	critical	to	try	to	account	for	how	lower
costs	 and	 product	 improvements	 can	 expand	 markets	 by	 appealing	 to	 new
customers,	in	addition	to	seizing	market	share	from	existing	players.	In	2014,
Aswath	Damodaran,	a	professor	of	finance	at	NYU’s	Stern	School	of	Business,
estimated	that	Uber	was	probably	worth	roughly	$6	billion,	based	on	its	ability
to	 ultimately	 win	 10	 percent	 of	 the	 global	 taxi	 market	 of	 $100	 billion,	 or
$10	 billion.	 According	 to	 Uber’s	 own	 projections,	 in	 2016	 the	 company
processed	over	$26	billion	in	payments.	It’s	safe	to	say	that	the	$10	billion
market	was	a	serious	underestimate,	as	the	ease	of	use	and	lower	cost	of	Uber
and	its	competitors	expanded	the	market	for	transportation-as-a-service.
As	Aaron	Levie,	the	founder	of	the	online	file	storage	company	Box	noted	in
a	tweet	in	2014,	“Sizing	the	market	for	a	disruptor	based	on	an	incumbent’s
market	is	like	sizing	a	car	industry	off	how	many	horses	there	were	in	1910.”
The	other	factor	that	can	lead	to	underestimating	a	market	is	neglecting	to
account	 for	 expanding	 into	 additional	 markets.	 Amazon	 began	 as	 Amazon
Books,	the	“Earth’s	Biggest	Bookstore.”	But	Jeff	Bezos	always	intended	for
bookselling	to	serve	as	a	beachhead	from	which	Amazon	could	expand	outward
to	 encompass	 his	 massive	 vision	 of	 “the	 everything	 store.”	 Today,	 Amazon
dominates	the	bookselling	industry,	but	thanks	to	relentless	market	expansion,
book	sales	represent	less	than	7	percent	of	Amazon’s	total	sales.
The	same	effect	can	be	seen	in	the	financial	results	of	Apple.	In	the	first
quarter	 of	 2017,	 Apple	 generated	 $7.2	 billion	 from	 the	 sale	 of	 personal
computers,	a	category	the	company	pioneered	and	once	dominated.	That’s	a
great	number	to	be	sure,	but,	over	that	same	financial	quarter,	Apple’s	total
revenue	was	a	whopping	$78.4	billion,	which	meant	that	Apple’s	original	market
accounted	for	less	than	10	percent	of	its	total	sales.
My	 Greylock	 colleague	 Jerry	 Chen,	 who	 helped	 Diane	 Greene	 scale
VMware’s	virtualization	software	into	a	massive	business,	likes	to	point	out,
“Every	billion-dollar	business	started	as	a	ten-million-dollar	business.”
But	whether	you	are	creating	a	new	market,	expanding	an	existing	market,	or
relying	on	adjacent	markets	to	get	to	those	“B’s”	that	investors	want	(baby),	you
need	to	have	a	plausible	path	to	get	from	here	to	there.	This	leads	us	to	one	of
my	favorite	growth	factors	to	discuss	with	entrepreneurs:	distribution.
GROWTH	FACTOR	#2:	DISTRIBUTION
The	second	growth	factor	needed	for	a	strong,	scalable	business	is	distribution.
Many	people	in	Silicon	Valley	like	to	focus	on	building	products	that	are,	in	the
famous	 words	 of	 the	 late	 Steve	 Jobs,	 “insanely	 great.”	 Great	 products	 are
certainly	a	positive—we’ll	discuss	the	lack	of	product	quality	as	a	growth	limiter
later	on—but	the	cold	and	unromantic	fact	is	that	a	good	product	with	great
distribution	will	almost	always	beat	a	great	product	with	poor	distribution.
Dropbox	is	a	company	with	a	great	product,	but	it	succeeded	because	of	its
great	distribution.	In	an	interview	for	Reid’s	Masters	of	Scale	podcast,	founder
and	CEO	Drew	Houston	said	that	he	believes	that	too	many	start-ups	overlook
the	importance	of	distribution:
Most	of	the	orthodoxy	in	Silicon	Valley	is	about	building	a	good
product.	I	think	that’s	because	most	companies	in	the	Valley	don’t
survive	 beyond	 the	 building-the-product	 phase.	 You	 have	 to	 be
good	at	building	a	product,	then	you	have	to	be	just	as	good	at
getting	 users,	 then	 you	 have	 to	 be	 just	 as	 good	 at	 building	 a
business	model.	If	you’re	missing	any	of	the	links	in	the	chain,	the
whole	chain	is	broken.
The	challenge	of	distribution	has	become	even	greater	in	the	“mobile	first”
era.	Unlike	the	Web,	where	search	engine	optimization	and	e-mail	links	were
broadly	applicable	and	successful	distribution	channels,	mobile	app	stores	offer
little	opportunity	for	serendipitous	product	discovery.	When	you	go	to	Apple’s
or	Google’s	app	store,	you’re	searching	for	a	specific	product.	Few	people	install
apps	just	for	the	hell	of	it.	As	a	result,	the	business	model	innovators	who	have
succeeded	(e.g.,	Instagram,	WhatsApp,	Snap)	have	had	to	find	creative	ways	to
get	broad	distribution	for	their	product—without	spending	a	lot	of	money.	These
distribution	 techniques	 fall	 into	 two	 general	 categories:	 leveraging	 existing
networks	and	virality.
A)	Leveraging	Existing	Networks
New	companies	rarely	have	the	reach	or	resources	to	simply	pour	money	into
advertising	 campaigns.	 Instead,	 they	 have	 to	 find	 creative	 ways	 to	 tap	 into
existing	networks	to	distribute	their	products.
When	 I	 was	 at	 PayPal,	 one	 of	 the	 major	 vehicles	 for	 distribution	 of	 our
payment	service	was	settling	purchases	on	eBay.	At	the	time,	eBay	was	already
one	of	the	largest	players	in	e-commerce,	and	by	the	beginning	of	2000	already
had	 ten	 million	 registered	 users.	 We	 tapped	 into	 this	 user	 base	 by	 building
software	that	made	it	extremely	easy	for	eBay	sellers	to	automatically	add	a
“Pay	with	PayPal”	button	to	all	of	their	eBay	listings.	The	amazing	thing	is	that
customers	 did	 so	 even	 though	 eBay	 had	 its	 own	 rival	 payments	 service,
Billpoint!	But	sellers	were	required	to	add	Billpoint	manually	to	each	of	their
listings;	PayPal	did	it	for	them.
Many	years	later,	Airbnb	was	able	to	perform	a	similar	feat	by	leveraging	the
online	classified	service	Craigslist.	Based	on	a	suggestion	from	Y	Combinator’s
Michael	Seibel,	Airbnb	built	a	system	that	allowed	and	encouraged	its	hosts	to
cross-post	 their	 listings	 to	 the	 much-larger	 Craigslist.	 Hosts	 were	 told,
“Reposting	your	listing	from	Airbnb	to	Craigslist	increases	your	earnings	by
$500	a	month	on	average,”	and	were	allowed	to	do	so	by	clicking	a	single
button.	This	took	serious	technology	skills—unlike	many	platforms,	Craigslist
doesn’t	 have	 an	 application	 programming	 interface	 (API)	 that	 allows	 other
software	to	interact	with	it—but	it	was	technology	innovation	for	the	purposes	of
distribution	 innovation,	 not	 product	 innovation.	 “It	 was	 a	 kind	 of	 a	 novel
approach,”	 Airbnb	 founder	 Nathan	 Blecharczyk	 said	 of	 the	 integration.	 “No
other	site	had	that	slick	an	integration.	It	was	quite	successful	for	us.”
Leveraging	an	existing	network	can	have	downsides,	of	course.	What	the
existing	network	gives	(or	unknowingly	allows	to	be	taken),	the	existing	network
can	also	take	away.	Zynga,	the	leading	social	games	company,	achieved	great
success	leveraging	Facebook	for	distribution,	but	had	to	dramatically	reengineer
its	distribution	model	after	Facebook	decided	to	stop	allowing	people	playing
Zynga	games	to	post	their	progress	to	their	Facebook	friends.	(Disclosure:	I	am	a
member	 of	 Zynga’s	 board	 of	 directors.)	 Zynga	 founder	 Mark	 Pincus	 was
farsighted	enough	to	build	a	strong	enough	franchise	to	survive	the	change.
In	 contrast,	 so-called	 content	 farms	 like	 Demand	 Media	 that	 leveraged
Google’s	search	platform	to	generate	website	traffic	and	advertising	revenues
never	recovered	after	Google	tuned	its	algorithms	to	deprioritize	content	from
what	it	called	“junk”	websites.
Despite	these	dangers,	leveraging	existing	networks	can	be	a	critical	part	of	a
business	model,	especially	if	these	networks	can	provide	a	“booster	rocket”	that
is	later	supplemented	with	virality	or	network	effects.
B)	Virality
“Viral”	distribution	occurs	when	the	users	of	a	product	bring	more	users,	and
those	users	bring	additional	users,	and	so	on,	much	like	an	infectious	virus
spreads	from	host	to	host.	Virality	can	either	be	organic—occurring	during	the
course	of	normal	usage	of	the	product—or	incentivized	by	some	kind	of	reward.
After	launching	LinkedIn,	the	team	and	I	devoted	significant	time	and	energy
to	figuring	out	how	to	improve	organic	virality;	that	is,	how	to	make	it	easier	for
existing	users	to	invite	friends	to	use	the	service.	One	way	we	did	this	was	to
refine	what	have	become	some	of	the	standard	tools	of	virality,	such	as	address
book	 importers.	 For	 example,	 we	 built	 software	 that	 allowed	 LinkedIn	 to
connect	to	our	users’	Outlook	contacts,	which	made	it	very	easy	for	them	to
invite	their	most	important	connections.
But	equally	important	was	an	unanticipated	source	of	virality.	As	it	turned	out,
users	wanted	to	use	their	LinkedIn	pages	as	their	primary	professional	identity
on	the	Internet.	Having	a	page	like	this	to	point	others	to—with	all	the	details	of
their	professional	life	together	in	one	place—generated	value	not	only	for	the
user,	but	for	the	people	viewing	the	page,	and	it	made	viewers	realize	that	they
should	get	their	own	LinkedIn	profile.	As	a	result,	we	added	public	profiles	as	a
systematic	tool	to	boost	both	the	member	value	proposition	and	our	viral	growth
rate.
At	 PayPal,	 we	 combined	 organic	 and	 incentivized	 virality.	 The	 payment
product	was	inherently	viral;	if	someone	e-mailed	you	money	using	PayPal,	you
had	to	set	up	an	account	to	get	paid.	But	we	enhanced	this	organic	virality	with
monetary	incentives.	If	you	referred	a	friend	to	PayPal,	you	got	$10,	and	your
friend	got	$10.	This	combination	of	organic	and	incentivized	virality	allowed
PayPal	 to	 grow	 7	 to	 10	 percent	 per	 day.	 As	 the	 PayPal	 network	 grew,	 we
reduced	the	incentives	to	$5	and	$5,	then	finally	eliminated	them	altogether.
Incentives	don’t	have	to	be	monetary;	like	PayPal,	Dropbox	used	a	similar
combination	 of	 organic	 virality	 (as	 users	 share	 files	 with	 nonusers)	 and
incentivized	virality	(Basic	account	holders	get	500	MB	of	extra	storage	per	user
they	 refer;	 Pro	 account	 holders	 get	 1	 GB)	 to	 grow.	 Even	 though	 Dropbox
invested	in	partnerships	with	leading	PC	makers	like	Dell,	Drew	Houston	credits
virality	 with	 driving	 the	 company’s	 rapid	 growth,	 helping	 it	 double	 its	 one
hundred	thousand	users	at	launch	to	two	hundred	thousand	users	just	ten	days
later,	then	skyrocket	to	one	million	users	just	seven	months	after	that.
If	your	distribution	strategy	focuses	on	virality,	you	also	have	to	focus	on
retention.	Bringing	new	users	in	through	the	front	door	doesn’t	help	you	grow	if
they	 immediately	 turn	 around	 and	 leave.	 According	 to	 Houston,	 Dropbox
discovered	this	truth	the	hard	way,	when	activation	rates	revealed	that	only
40	percent	of	the	people	signing	up	were	actually	putting	files	in	their	Dropbox
and	linking	them	to	their	computers.	In	an	interview	for	my	Masters	of	Scale
podcast,	 Drew	 described	 a	 scene	 reminiscent	 of	 the	 television	 show	 Silicon
Valley	(but	with	a	happier	ending):
What	we	did	is	we	went	on	Craigslist	and	offered	$40	to	anyone
who’d	come	in	for	half	an	hour—a	poor	man’s	usability	test.	We’re
like,	“All	right,	sit	down.	This	is	an	invitation	to	Dropbox	in	your	e-
mail.	Go	from	here	to	sharing	a	file	with	this	e-mail	address.”	Zero
of	the	five	people	we	tested	succeeded.	Zero	of	the	five	even	came
close.	This	was	just	stunning.	We’re	like,	“Oh	my	God,	this	is	the
worst	product	ever	created.”	So	we	made	a	list	of	like	eighty	things
in	this	Excel	spreadsheet,	then	just	sanded	down	all	these	rough
edges	in	the	experience,	and	watched	our	activation	rate	climb.
Virality	almost	always	requires	a	product	that	is	either	free	or	freemium	(i.e.,
free	up	to	a	certain	point,	after	which	the	user	has	to	pay	to	upgrade—Dropbox,
for	example,	offers	2	GB	of	free	storage).	We	can’t	recall	a	single	instance	of	a
company	 that	 grew	 to	 a	 massive	 scale	 by	 leveraging	 the	 virality	 of	 a	 paid
product.
One	 of	 the	 most	 powerful	 distribution	 innovations	 is	 to	 combine	 both
strategies.	Facebook	was	able	to	do	this	by	harnessing	the	organic	virality	of	a
social	network	 (where	 users	 invite	 other	 users	 to	 join	 them)	 and	 leveraging
existing	networks	centered	around	campuses	by	rolling	out	the	product	on	a
college-by-college	basis.	We’ll	discuss	Facebook’s	rollout	strategy	in	greater
depth	when	we	consider	network	effects.
GROWTH	FACTOR	#3:	HIGH	GROSS	MARGINS
One	of	the	key	growth	factors	that	entrepreneurs	often	overlook	is	the	power	of
high	gross	margins.	Gross	margins,	which	represent	sales	minus	the	cost	of
goods	sold,	are	probably	the	best	measure	of	long-term	unit	economics.	The
higher	the	gross	margin,	the	more	valuable	each	dollar	of	sales	is	to	the	company
because	it	 means	 that	 for	 each	 dollar	of	 sales,	 the	 company	 has	 more	 cash
available	to	fund	growth	and	expansion.	Many	high-tech	businesses	have	high
gross	margins	by	default,	which	is	why	this	factor	is	often	overlooked.	Software
businesses	have	high	gross	margins	because	the	cost	of	duplicating	software	is
essentially	zero.	Software-as-a-service	(SaaS)	businesses	have	a	slightly	higher
cost	of	goods	sold	because	they	need	to	operate	a	service,	but	thanks	to	cloud
providers	like	Amazon,	this	cost	is	becoming	smaller	all	the	time.
In	contrast,	“old	economy”	businesses	often	have	low	gross	margins.	Growing
wheat	is	a	low-margin	business,	as	is	selling	goods	in	a	store	or	serving	food	in	a
restaurant.	One	of	the	most	amazing	things	about	Amazon’s	success	is	that	it	has
been	able	to	build	a	massive	business	based	on	retailing,	which	is	generally	a
low-margin	industry.	And	even	Amazon	now	relies	heavily	on	its	high-margin
SaaS	business,	Amazon	Web	Services	(AWS).	In	2016,	AWS	accounted	for
150	percent	of	Amazon’s	operating	income,	which	means	that	the	retail	business
actually	lost	money.
Most	of	the	valuable	companies	we’re	focusing	on	in	this	book	have	gross
margins	of	over	60,	70,	or	even	80	percent.	In	2016,	Google	had	a	gross	income
of	$54.6	billion	on	sales	of	$89.7	billion,	for	a	gross	margin	of	61	percent.
Facebook’s	gross	income	was	$23.9	billion	on	sales	of	$27.6	billion,	for	a	gross
margin	of	87	percent.	In	2015,	LinkedIn’s	gross	margin	was	86	percent.	As
we’ve	already	discussed,	Amazon	is	the	outlier,	with	a	2016	gross	income	of
$47.7	billion	on	$136	billion	in	sales,	for	a	gross	margin	of	35	percent.	Yet	even
Amazon’s	gross	margins	are	greater	than	those	of	a	“high	margin”	traditional
company	 like	 General	 Electric,	 which	 in	 2016	 had	 a	 gross	 income	 of
$32.2	billion	on	sales	of	$119.7	billion,	for	a	gross	margin	of	27	percent.
High	gross	margins	are	a	powerful	growth	factor	because,	as	noted	below,	not
all	revenue	is	created	equal.	The	key	insight	here	is	that	even	though	gross
margins	matter	a	great	deal	to	the	seller,	they	are	irrelevant	to	the	buyer.	How
often	do	you	consider	the	gross	margin	involved	when	you	make	a	purchase?
Would	you	ever	choose	Burger	King	over	McDonald’s	because	Whoppers	are
lower	margin	than	Big	Macs?	Typically,	you	focus	solely	on	the	cost	to	you,	and
the	perceived	benefits	of	the	purchase.	This	means	that	it’s	not	necessarily	any
easier	to	sell	a	low-margin	product	than	a	high-margin	product.	If	possible	then,
a	company	should	design	a	high-gross-margin	business	model.
Second,	high-gross-margin	businesses	are	attractive	to	investors,	who	will
often	pay	a	premium	for	the	cash-generating	power	of	such	a	business.	As	the
prominent	investor	Bill	Gurley	wrote	in	his	2011	blog	post,	“All	Revenue	Is	Not
Created	Equal,”	“Investors	love	companies	where,	all	things	being	equal,	higher
revenues	create	higher	profit	margins.	Selling	more	copies	of	the	same	piece	of
software	 (with	 zero	 incremental	 costs)	 is	 a	 business	 that	 scales	 nicely.”
Appealing	to	investors	makes	it	easier	to	raise	larger	amounts	of	money	at	higher
valuations	when	the	company	is	privately	held	(we’ll	delve	into	the	details	of
why	this	is	so	important	later	on),	and	lowers	the	cost	of	capital	when	the
company	is	publicly	traded.	This	access	to	capital	is	a	key	factor	in	being	able	to
finance	lightning-fast	growth.
It’s	 important	 to	 note	 the	 difference	 between	 potential	 gross	 margin	 and
realized	 gross	 margin.	 Many	 blitzscalers,	 such	 as	 Amazon	 or	 the	 Chinese
hardware	 makers	 Huawei	 and	 Xiaomi,	 deliberately	 price	 their	 products	 to
maximize	market	share	rather	than	gross	margins.	As	Jeff	Bezos	is	fond	of
saying,	“Your	margin	is	my	opportunity.”	Xiaomi	explicitly	targets	a	net	margin
of	1	to	3	percent,	a	practice	it	credits	Costco	for	inspiring.	All	other	factors	being
equal,	investors	almost	always	place	a	much	higher	value	on	companies	with
higher	potential	gross	margins	than	companies	that	have	already	maximized	their
realized	gross	margins.
Finally,	most	of	a	company’s	operational	challenges	scale	based	on	revenues
or	unit	sales	volume,	not	gross	margin.	If	you	have	a	million	customers	who
generate	$100	million	per	year	in	sales,	the	cost	to	serve	those	customers	doesn’t
change	whether	your	gross	margin	is	10	percent	or	80	percent;	you	still	need	to
hire	enough	people	to	respond	to	their	support	requests.	But	it’s	a	lot	easier	to
afford	good	customer	support	when	you	have	$80	million	in	gross	margin	to
spend	rather	than	$10	million.
Conversely,	 it’s	 a	 lot	 easier	 to	 sell	 and	 service	 125,000	 customers	 who
generate	$12.5	million	per	year	in	sales	and	$10	million	in	gross	margin	than	it	is
to	have	to	sell	and	service	a	million	customers	who	generate	$100	million	in
sales	to	achieve	that	same	$10	million	in	gross	margin.	That’s	eight	times	as
many	customers	and	eight	times	the	revenues,	which	means	eight	times	as	many
salespeople,	customer	service	representatives,	accountants,	and	so	on.
Designing	a	high-gross-margin	business	model	makes	your	chances	of	success
greater	and	the	rewards	of	success	even	greater.	As	we’ll	see	in	a	later	section,
high	gross	margins	have	helped	even	nontech	businesses,	such	as	the	Spanish
clothing	retailer	Zara,	grow	into	global	giants.
GROWTH	FACTOR	#4:	NETWORK	EFFECTS
Market	size,	distribution,	and	gross	margins	are	important	factors	in	growing	a
company,	but	the	final	growth	factor	plays	the	key	role	in	sustaining	that	growth
long	enough	to	build	a	massively	valuable	and	lasting	franchise.	While	the	past
twenty	years	have	driven	improvements	in	the	first	three	growth	factors,	the	rise
in	Internet	usage	around	the	world	has	pushed	network	effects	to	levels	never
before	seen	in	our	economy.
The	increasing	importance	of	network	effects	is	one	of	the	main	reasons	that
technology	has	become	a	more	dominant	part	of	the	economy.
At	the	end	of	1996,	the	five	most	valuable	companies	in	the	world	were
General	Electric,	Royal	Dutch	Shell,	the	Coca-Cola	Company,	NTT	(Nippon
Telegraph	 and	 Telephone),	 and	 ExxonMobil—traditional	 industrial	 and
consumer	companies	that	relied	on	massive	economies	of	scale	and	decades	of
branding	to	drive	their	value.	Just	twenty-one	years	later,	in	the	fourth	quarter	of
2017,	the	list	looked	very	different:	Apple,	Google,	Microsoft,	Amazon,	and
Facebook.	That’s	a	remarkable	shift.	Indeed,	while	Apple	and	Microsoft	were
already	prominent	companies	at	the	end	of	1996,	Amazon	was	still	a	privately
held	start-up,	Larry	Page	and	Sergey	Brin	were	still	a	pair	of	graduate	students	at
Stanford	 who	 were	 two	 years	 away	 from	 founding	 Google,	 and	 Mark
Zuckerberg	was	still	looking	forward	to	his	bar	mitzvah.
So	what	happened?	The	Networked	Age	happened,	that’s	what.
Technology	now	connects	all	of	us	in	ways	that	were	unthinkable	to	our
ancestors.	Over	two	billion	people	now	carry	smartphones	(many	of	them	made
by	 Apple,	 or	 using	 Google’s	 Android	 operating	 system)	 that	 keep	 them
constantly	connected	to	the	global	network	of	everything.	At	any	time,	those
people	can	find	almost	any	information	in	the	world	(Google),	buy	almost	any
product	in	the	world	(Amazon/Alibaba),	or	communicate	with	almost	any	other
human	in	the	world	(Facebook/WhatsApp/Instagram/WeChat).
In	this	highly	connected	world,	more	companies	than	ever	are	able	to	tap	into
network	effects	to	generate	outsize	growth	and	profits.
We’ll	use	the	simple	layman’s	definition	of	network	effects	in	this	book:
A	product	or	service	is	subject	to	positive	network	effects	when
increased	usage	by	any	user	increases	the	value	of	the	product	or
service	for	other	users.
Economists	refer	to	these	effects	as	“demand-side	economies	of	scale”	or,	more
generally,	“positive	externalities.”
The	magic	of	network	effects	is	that	they	generate	a	positive	feedback	loop
that	results	in	superlinear	growth	and	value	creation.	This	superlinear	effect
makes	it	very	difficult	for	any	node	in	the	network	to	switch	from	an	incumbent
to	an	alternative	(“customer	lock-in”),	since	it	is	almost	impossible	for	any	new
entrant	to	match	the	value	of	plugging	into	the	existing	network.	(Nodes	in	these
networks	are	typically	customers	or	users,	as	in	the	canonical	example	of	the	fax
machine,	or	the	more	recent	example	of	Facebook,	but	can	also	be	data	elements
or	other	fundamental	assets	valuable	in	a	business.)
The	resulting	phenomenon	of	“increasing	returns	to	scale”	often	results	in	an
ultimate	equilibrium	in	which	a	single	product	or	company	dominates	the	market
and	collects	the	majority	of	its	industry’s	profits.	So	it’s	no	surprise	that	smart
entrepreneurs	 strive	 to	 create	 (and	 smart	 investors	 want	 to	 invest	 in)	 these
network	effects	start-ups.
Several	generations	of	start-ups	have	tapped	these	dynamics	to	build	dominant
positions,	from	eBay	to	Facebook	to	Airbnb.	To	accomplish	these	goals,	it’s
critical	to	develop	a	rigorous	understanding	of	how	network	effects	work.	My
Greylock	colleague	Simon	Rothman	is	one	of	the	world’s	premier	experts	on
network	 effects	 from	 building	 eBay’s	 $14	 billion	 automotive	 marketplace.
Simon	warns,	“A	lot	of	people	try	to	bolt	on	network	effects	by	doing	things	like
adding	a	profile.	‘Marketplaces	have	profiles,’	they	reason,	‘so	if	I	add	profiles,
I’ll	be	adding	network	effects.’ ”	Yet	the	reality	of	building	network	effects	is	a
bit	 more	 complicated.	 Rather	 than	 simply	 imitate	 specific	 features,	 the	 best
blitzscalers	study	the	different	types	of	network	effects	and	design	them	into
their	business	models.
Five	Categories	of	Network	Effects
On	 his	 industrial	 organization	 of	 information	 technology	 website,	 the	 NYU
professor	 Arun	 Sundararajan	 classifies	 network	 effects	 into	 five	 broad
categories:
1.	 Direct	 Network	 Effects:	 Increases	 in	 usage	 lead	 to	 direct	 increases	 in
value.	(Examples:	Facebook,	messaging	apps	like	WeChat	and	WhatsApp)
2.	 Indirect	Network	Effects:	Increases	in	usage	encourage	consumption	of
complementary	goods,	which	increases	the	value	of	the	original	product.
(Example:	Adoption	of	an	operating	system	such	as	Microsoft	Windows,
iOS,	 or	 Android	 encourages	 third-party	 software	 developers	 to	 build
applications,	increasing	the	value	of	the	platform.)
3.	 Two-Sided	 Network	 Effects:	 Increases	 in	 usage	 by	 one	 set	 of	 users
increases	the	value	to	a	different	set	of	complementary	users,	and	vice	versa.
(Example:	Marketplaces	such	as	eBay,	Uber,	and	Airbnb)
4.	 Local	 Network	 Effects:	 Increases	 in	 usage	 by	 a	 small	 subset	 of	 users
increases	the	value	for	a	connected	user.	(Example:	Back	in	the	days	of
metered	 calls,	 certain	 wireless	 carriers	 allowed	 subscribers	 to	 specify	 a
limited	number	of	“favorites”	whose	calls	didn’t	count	against	the	monthly
allotment	of	call	minutes.)
5.	 Compatibility	 and	 Standards:	 The	 use	 of	 one	 technology	 product
encourages	the	use	of	compatible	products.	(Example:	within	the	Microsoft
Office	suite,	Word’s	dominance	meant	that	its	document	file	format	became
the	standard;	this	has	allowed	it	to	destroy	competitors	like	WordPerfect	and
fend	off	open-source	solutions	like	OpenDocument.)
Any	of	these	different	network	effects	can	have	a	major	impact;	Microsoft’s
ability	to	tap	into	multiple	network	effects	with	Windows	and	Office	contributed
greatly	 to	 its	 unprecedentedly	 durable	 franchise.	 Even	 today,	 Windows	 and
Office	remain	dominant	in	the	PC	market;	it’s	simply	that	other	platforms	like
mobile	have	achieved	similar	or	greater	importance.
Network	Effects	Both	Produce	and	Require	Aggressive	Growth
A	key	element	of	leveraging	network	effects	is	the	aggressive	pursuit	of	network
growth	 and	 adoption.	 Because	 the	 impact	 of	 network	 effects	 increases	 in	 a
superlinear	 fashion,	 at	 lower	 levels	 of	 scale,	 network	 effects	 actually	 exert
downward	pressure	on	user	adoption.	Once	all	your	friends	are	on	Facebook,
you	have	to	be	on	Facebook	too.	But	conversely,	why	would	you	join	Facebook
if	none	of	your	friends	had	joined	yet?	The	same	is	true	for	the	first	user	of
