--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
Supply Chain Management
Strategy , Planning , and  OPeratiOn
Sixth Edition

--- PAGE 3 ---
         This page is intentionally left blank.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Supply Chain Management
Strategy , Planning , and  OPeratiOn
Sixth Edition
Sunil Chopra
Kellogg School of Management
Peter Meindl
Kepos Capital
Dharam Vir Kalra
Guest Faculty
Indian Institute of Management Rohtak
Delhi • Chennai

--- PAGE 5 ---
Copyright © 2016 Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd
ISBN: 
Published by Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd, CIN: U72200TN2005PTC057128, formerly 
known as TutorVista Global Pvt. Ltd, licensee of Pearson Education in South Asia
No part of this eBook may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without the publisher’s prior 
written consent. 
This eBook may or may not include all assets that were part of the print version. The publisher reserves the 
right to remove any material in this eBook at any time. 
Head Office: A-8 (A), 7th Floor, Knowledge Boulevard, Sector 62, Noida 201 309, Uttar Pradesh, India.
Registered Office: Module G4, Ground Floor, Elnet Software City, TS-140, Block 2
Salai, Taramani, Chennai 600 113, Tamil Nadu, India. 
Fax:  080-30461003, Phone: 080-30461060 
www.pearson.co.in, Email: companysecretary.india@pearson.com 
eISBN: 978-93-325-8267-5 
 & 9 Rajiv Gandhi
978-93-325-4823-7

--- PAGE 6 ---
Dedication
I would like to thank my colleagues at Kellogg for all I have learned from 
them about logistics and supply chain management. I am grateful for the love 
and encouragement that my parents, Krishan and Pushpa, and sisters, Sudha 
and Swati, have always provided during every endeavor in my life. I thank my 
children, Ravi and Rajiv, for the joy they have brought me. Finally, none of this 
would have been possible without the constant love, caring, and support  
of my wife, Maria Cristina.
—Sunil Chopra
I would like to thank three mentors—Sunil Chopra, Hau Lee, and Gerry 
Lieberman—who have taught me a great deal. Thank you also to my parents 
and sister for their love, and to my sons, Jamie and Eric, for making me smile 
and teaching me what life is truly all about. Most important, I thank my wife, 
Sarah, who makes life wonderful and whom I love with all my heart.
—Peter Meindl
I would like to dedicate this work to my dear wife Sunil and my adorable 
daughters, Ruma and Anju, who have been a constant source of support and 
encouragement. I love them dearly.
—Dharam Vir Kalra

--- PAGE 7 ---
         This page is intentionally left blank.

--- PAGE 8 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
SUNIL CHOPRA
Sunil Chopra is the IBM Distinguished Professor of Operations Management and 
 Information Systems at the Kellogg School of Management. He has served as the interim 
dean and senior associate dean for curriculum and teaching, and the codirector of the 
MMM program, a joint dual-degree program between the Kellogg School of Manage-
ment and the McCormick School of Engineering at Northwestern University. He has a 
PhD in operations research from SUNY at Stony Brook. Prior to joining Kellogg, he 
taught at New York University and spent a year at IBM Research.
Professor Chopra’s research and teaching interests are in supply chain and logistics 
management, operations management, and the design of telecommunication networks. 
He has won several teaching awards at the MBA and Executive programs of Kellogg. He 
has authored more than 40 papers and two books.
He has been a department editor for Management Science and an associate editor 
for Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, Operations Research, and Deci-
sion  Sciences Journal. His recent research has focused on understanding supply chain 
risk and devising  effective risk mitigation strategies. He has also consulted for several 
firms in the area of supply chain and operations management.
PETER MEINDL
Peter Meindl is a portfolio manager with Kepos Capital in New York. Previously, he was 
a research officer with Barclays Global Investors, a consultant with the Boston Consult-
ing Group and Mercer Management Consulting, and the director of strategy with  
i2  Technologies. He holds PhD, MS, BS, and BA degrees from Stanford, and an MBA 
from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern.
DHARAM VIR KALRA
Dharam Vir Kalra retired from the Indian Army as Lieutenant General in 1993. During 
his service, he held various prestigious positions in the field of logistics. He was Major 
General Operational Logistics, and Commandant and Principal in College of Materials 
Management, Jabalpur. He then rose to become Director General Ordnance Services.
General Kalra obtained his M.Sc. in Defence Studies from Madras University. He 
also obtained Master’s degrees in Political Science and Business Administration (Materials) 
from Jabalpur University. A graduate of the Defence Services Staff College, he also 
attended the Long Defence Management Course and the National Defence College Course. 
He completed a specialist course at the Royal Military College of Science, Shrivenham 
(UK). He has recently obtained an M.Phil Degree from the University of Madras.
Apart from his military service, General Kalra has been Dean, Faculty of Management, 
Jabalpur University; Consultant, Ministry of Defence, Government of India; Consultant, Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India; and Member, National Audit Advisory Board. He is a fellow of the 
Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport (UK) and Indian Management Association, and also a 
Member Board of Studies of Indian Institute of Materials Management.
Currently, he is a guest faculty for Supply Chain Management and International Logistics 
at the Indian Institute of Management Rohtak.
General Kalra was decorated with an Ati Vishisht Seva Medal by the President of India in 
1988 and with Param Vishisht Seva Medal in 1992 for services of an exceptional order.


--- PAGE 9 ---
         This page is intentionally left blank.

--- PAGE 10 ---
CONTENTS
Preface xvii
Part I Building a Strategic Framework to Analyze Supply Chains
 Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE SUPPLY CHAIN 1
1.1 What Is a Supply Chain? 1
1.2 Historical Perspective 3
1.3 The Objective of a Supply Chain 5
1.4 The Importance of Supply Chain Decisions 7
1.5 Decision Phases in a Supply Chain 9
1.6 Process Views of a Supply Chain 11
1.7 Examples of Supply Chains 16
1.8 Summary of Learning Objectives 22
Discussion Questions 22 • Bibliography 23
 Chapter 2 SUPPLY CHAIN PERFORMANCE: ACHIEVING STRATEGIC FIT AND SCOPE 25
2.1 Competitive and Supply Chain Strategies 25
2.2 Achieving Strategic Fit 27
2.3 Expanding Strategic Scope 37
2.4 Challenges to Achieving and Maintaining  Strategic Fit 40
2.5 Achieving and Maintaining Strategic Fit in Emerging 
Retail Markets: The Indian Scenario 41
2.6 The Experience 43
2.7 Adaptation 43
2.8 Summary of Learning Objectives 44
Discussion Questions 45 • Bibliography 45
▶ CASE STUDY: The Demise of Blockbuster 46
▶ CASE STUDY: Rise and Fall of Subhiksha 48
 Chapter 3 SUPPLY CHAIN DRIVERS AND METRICS 49
3.1 Impellers of Supply Chain 49
3.2 Financial Measures of Performance 51
3.3 Drivers of Supply Chain Performance 55
3.4 Framework for Structuring Drivers 57
3.5 Facilities 58
3.6 Inventory 60
3.7 Transportation 63
3.8 Information 64
3.9 Sourcing 67
3.10 Pricing 68
3.11 Infrastructure 70
3.12 International Logistics 72

--- PAGE 11 ---
x Contents
3.13 Summary of Learning Objectives 73
Discussion Questions 74 • Bibliography 74
▶ CASE STUDY: Seven-Eleven Japan Co. 75
▶ CASE STUDY:  Financial Statements for Walmart Stores Inc. and  Macy’s Inc. 81
Part II Designing the Supply Chain Network
 Chapter 4 DESIGNING DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS AND APPLICATIONS TO ONLINE 
SALES 83
4.1 The Role of Distribution in the Supply Chain 83
4.2 Factors Influencing Distribution Network Design 85
4.3 Design Options for a Distribution Network 88
4.4 Online Sales and the Distribution Network 101
4.5  Indian Agricultural Produce Distribution Channels: Ripe for Major Transformation 114
4.6 Indian Fmcg Sector-distribution Channels 118
4.7 Indian Commodities Distribution Channels 119
4.8 Distribution Networks in Practice 119
4.9 Summary of Learning Objectives 120
Discussion Questions 121 • Bibliography 122
▶ CASE STUDY: Blue Nile and Diamond Retailing 122
 Chapter 5 NETWORK DESIGN IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN 130
5.1 The Role of Network Design in the Supply Chain 130
5.2 Factors Influencing Network Design Decisions 131
5.3 Framework for Network Design Decisions 136
5.4 Models for Facility Location and Capacity Allocation 139
5.5 Jaipur Rugs–networking Tradition with Modernity 154
5.6 Making Network Design Decisions in Practice 159
5.7 The Impact of Uncertainty on Network Design 160
5.8 Summary of Learning Objectives 162
Discussion Questions 162 • Exercises 163 • Bibliography 167
▶ CASE STUDY: Managing Growth at SportStuff.com 168
▶ CASE STUDY: Designing the Production Network at CoolWipes 170
 Chapter 6 DESIGNING GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN NETWORKS 172
6.1 The Impact of Globalization on Supply Chain Networks 172
6.2 The Offshoring Decision: Total Cost 174
6.3 Risk Management in Global Supply Chains 177
6.4 Discounted Cash Flows 181
6.5 Evaluating Network Design Decisions Using Decision Trees 183
6.6 To Onshore or Offshore: Evaluation of Global Supply Chain Design Decisions Under 
Uncertainty 190
6.7 Making Global Supply Chain Design Decisions Under Uncertainty in Practice 198
6.8 Summary of Learning Objectives 199
Discussion Questions 200 • Exercises 200 • Bibliography 201
▶ CASE STUDY: BioPharma, Inc. 203
▶ CASE STUDY: The Sourcing Decision at Forever Young 205

--- PAGE 12 ---
 Contents xi
Part III Planning and Coordinating Demand and Supply in a Supply Chain 
 Chapter 7 DEMAND FORECASTING IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 206
7.1 The Role of Forecasting in a Supply Chain 206
7.2 Characteristics of Forecasts 207
7.3 Components of a Forecast and Forecasting Methods 208
7.4 Basic Approach to Demand Forecasting 209
7.5 Time-Series Forecasting Methods 211
7.6 Measures of Forecast Error 221
7.7 Selecting the Best Smoothing Constant 224
7.8 Forecasting Demand at Tahoe Salt 226
7.9 The Role of IT in Forecasting 231
7.10 Forecasting in Practice 232
7.11 Summary of Learning Objectives 233
Discussion Questions 233 • Exercises 234 • Bibliography 235
▶ CASE STUDY: Specialty Packaging Corporation 236
 Chapter 8 AGGREGATE PLANNING IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 238
8.1 The Role of Aggregate Planning in a Supply Chain 238
8.2 The Aggregate Planning Problem 240
8.3 Aggregate Planning Strategies 242
8.4 Aggregate Planning at Red Tomato Tools 243
8.5 Aggregate Planning Using Linear Programming 244
8.6 Aggregate Planning in Excel 249
8.7 Building a Rough Master Production Schedule 253
8.8 The Role of IT in Aggregate Planning 254
8.9 Inventory Planning and Economic Theory Aberrations 254
8.10 Implementing Aggregate Planning in Practice 256
8.11 Summary of Learning Objectives 257
Discussion Questions 258 • Exercises 258 • Bibliography 260
▶ CASE STUDY: Kloss Planters and Harvesters 260
 Chapter 9 SALES AND OPERATIONS PLANNING: PLANNING SUPPLY AND DEMAND IN 
A SUPPLY CHAIN 262
9.1 Responding to Predictable Variability in the Supply Chain 262
9.2 Managing Supply 263
9.3 Managing Demand 265
9.4 Sales and Operations Planning at Red Tomato 266
9.5 Implementing Sales and Operations Planning in Practice 272
9.6 Tackling Predictable Variability in Practice—Indian Sugar Industry 273
9.7 Summary of Learning Objectives 275
Discussion Questions 275 • Exercises 275 • Bibliography 277
▶ CASE STUDY: Mintendo Game Girl 278
▶ CASE STUDY: Promotion Challenges at Gulmarg Skis 279

--- PAGE 13 ---
xii Contents
 Chapter 10 COORDINATION IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 281
10.1 Lack of Supply Chain Coordination and the Bullwhip Effect 281
10.2 The Effect on Performance of Lack of Coordination 283
10.3 Obstacles to Coordination in a Supply Chain 285
10.4 Managerial Levers to Achieve Coordination 289
10.5 Continuous Replenishment and Vendor-Managed Inventories 294
10.6 Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenishment 294
10.7 Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenishment—Indian Experiences 298
10.8 Achieving Coordination in Practice 299
10.9 Summary of Learning Objectives 300
Discussion Questions 301 • Bibliography 301
Part IV Planning and Managing Inventories in a Supply Chain 
 Chapter 11 MANAGING ECONOMIES OF SCALE IN A SUPPLY CHAIN: CYCLE 
INVENTORY 302
11.1 The Role of Cycle Inventory in a Supply Chain 302
11.2 Estimating Cycle Inventory-Related Costs in Practice 305
11.3 Economies of Scale to Exploit Fixed Costs 307
11.4 Aggregating Multiple Products in a Single Order 312
11.5 Economies of Scale to Exploit Quantity Discounts 320
11.6 Short-Term Discounting: Trade Promotions 331
11.7 Managing Multiechelon Cycle Inventory 336
11.8 Cycle Inventory Optimisation in Indian Distribution Channels 339
11.9 Summary of Learning Objectives 341
Discussion Questions 341 • Exercises 342 • Bibliography 345
▶ CASE STUDY: Delivery Strategy at MoonChem 346
▶ CASE STUDY: Pricing and Delivery at KAR Foods 348
Appendix 11A: Economic Order Quantity 349
 Chapter 12 MANAGING UNCERTAINTY IN A SUPPLY CHAIN: SAFETY INVENTORY 350
12.1 The Role of Safety Inventory in a Supply Chain 350
12.2 Factors Affecting the Level of Safety Inventory 352
12.3 Determining the Appropriate Level of Safety Inventory 354
12.4 Impact of Supply Uncertainty on Safety Inventory 363
12.5 Impact of Aggregation on Safety Inventory 366
12.6 Managing Uncertainty in Supply Chain Through Postponement—Indian 
Paint Industry 378
12.7 Impact of Replenishment Policies on Safety Inventory 379
12.8 Managing Safety Inventory in a Multiechelon Supply Chain 382
12.9 The Role of IT in Inventory Management 383
12.10 Estimating and Managing Safety Inventory in Practice 384
12.11 Summary of Learning Objectives 385
Discussion Questions 386 • Exercises 386 • Bibliography 390

--- PAGE 14 ---
 Contents xiii
▶ CASE STUDY: Managing Inventories at ALKO Inc. 390
▶ CASE STUDY: Should Packing Be Postponed to the DC? 392
Appendix 12A: The Normal Distribution 394
Appendix 12B: The Normal Distribution in Excel 395
Appendix 12C: Expected Shortage per Replenishment Cycle 395
Appendix 12D:  Evaluating Safety Inventory for Slow-Moving Items 396
 Chapter 13 DETERMINING THE OPTIMAL LEVEL OF PRODUCT AVAILABILITY 398
13.1 The Importance of the Level of Product Availability 398
13.2 Factors Affecting Optimal Level of Product Availability 399
13.3 Managerial Levers to Improve Supply Chain Profitability 409
13.4 Setting Product Availability for Multiple Products Under Capacity 
Constraints 423
13.5 Optimising Availability of Maintenance, Repair, and Operations Inventories 425
13.6 Setting Optimal Levels of Product Availability in Practice 428
13.7 Summary of Learning Objectives 428
Discussion Questions 429 • Exercises 429 • Bibliography 431
▶ CASE STUDY: The Need for Speed at Winner Apparel 432
Appendix 13A: Optimal Level of Product Availability 433
Appendix 13B: An Intermediate Evaluation 434
Appendix 13C: Expected Profit from an Order 435
Appendix 13D: Expected Overstock from an Order 435
Appendix 13E: Expected Understock from an Order 436
Appendix 13F: Simulation Using Spreadsheets 436
Part V Designing and Planning Transportation Networks 
 Chapter 14 TRANSPORTATION IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 439
14.1 The Role of Transportation in a Supply Chain 439
14.2 Modes of Transportation and Their Performance Characteristics 441
14.3 Transportation Infrastructure and Policies 445
14.4 Design Options for a Transportation Network 448
14.5 Mumbai Dabbawalas: A Highly Responsive Distribution Network 454
14.6 Trade-Offs in Transportation Design 455
14.7 Tailored Transportation 464
14.8 The Role of IT in Transportation 466
14.9 Making Transportation Decisions in Practice 467
14.10 Summary of Learning Objectives 468
Discussion Questions 468 • Bibliography 469
▶ CASE STUDY:  Designing the Distribution Network for Michael’s Hardware 469
▶ CASE STUDY:  The Future of Same-Day Delivery: Same as the Past? 470
▶ CASE STUDY: Selecting Transportation Modes for China Imports 471
Appendix 14A: Transporting The Transport 472
Appendix 14B: Gopaljee: Milk Run for Milk 479

--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv Contents
Part VI Managing Cross-Functional Drivers in a Supply Chain
 Chapter 15 SOURCING DECISIONS IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 483
15.1 The Role of Sourcing in a Supply Chain 483
15.2 In-House or Outsource? 485
15.3 Examples of Successful Third-Party Suppliers 491
15.4 Total Cost of Ownership 493
15.5 Supplier Selection—Auctions and Negotiations 496
15.6 Sharing Risk and Reward in the Supply Chain 498
15.7 The Impact of Incentives When Outsourcing 509
15.8 Designing a Sourcing Portfolio: Tailored Sourcing 510
15.9 Making Sourcing Decisions in Practice 513
15.10 Summary of Learning Objectives 514
Discussion Questions 515 • Exercises 515 • Bibliography 516
 Chapter 16 PRICING AND REVENUE MANAGEMENT IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 518
16.1 The Role of Pricing and Revenue Management in a Supply Chain 518
16.2 Pricing and Revenue Management for Multiple Customer Segments 520
16.3 Pricing and Revenue Management for Perishable Assets 527
16.4 Pricing and Revenue Management for Seasonal Demand 534
16.5 Pricing and Revenue Management for Bulk and Spot Contracts 534
16.6 Using Pricing and Revenue Management in Practice 536
16.7 Agriculture Produce Pricing and Marketing in India 537
16.8 Summary of Learning Objectives 537
Discussion Questions 538 •  Exercises 538 • Bibliography 539
▶ CASE STUDY: To Savor or to Groupon? 540
 Chapter 17 SUSTAINABILITY AND THE SUPPLY CHAIN 542
17.1 The Role of Sustainability in a Supply Chain 542
17.2 The Tragedy of the Commons 544
17.3 Key Pillars of Sustainability 547
17.4 Sustainability and Supply Chain Drivers 550
17.5 Closed-Loop Supply Chains 554
17.6 The Pricing of Sustainability 555
17.7 Summary of Learning Objectives 557
Discussion Questions 558 • Bibliography 558
▶ CASE STUDY: Sustainable Supply Chains—Indian Efforts 559
▶ CASE STUDY: HUL—A Sustainable Supply Chain 559
▶ CASE STUDY: Future of Supply Chains 560

--- PAGE 16 ---
 Contents xv
Part VII Online Chapter
 Chapter A INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 
The Role of IT in a Supply Chain
The Supply Chain IT Framework
Customer Relationship Management
Internal Supply Chain Management
Supplier Relationship Management
The Transaction Management Foundation
The Future of IT in the Supply Chain
Risk Management in IT
Supply Chain IT in Practice
Summary of Learning Objectives
Discussion Questions • Bibliography
Index 563

--- PAGE 17 ---
         This page is intentionally left blank.

--- PAGE 18 ---
PREFACE
This book is targeted toward an academic as well as a practitioner audience. On the academic side, it should be appropriate 
for MBA students, engineering master’s students, and senior undergraduate students interested in supply chain manage-
ment and logistics. It should also serve as a suitable reference for both concepts as well as providing a methodology for 
practitioners in consulting and industry.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
The sixth edition has focused on allowing students to learn more as they study with the book. We have tightened the link between 
examples in the book and associated spreadsheets and have added exercises and cases in several chapters. We have also added 
changes based on specific reviewer feedback that we believe significantly improve the book and its use by faculty and students.
• We have added several new mini-cases throughout the book. New cases appear in Chapters 2, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, and 16. 
Information in other cases has been updated to be current.
• In Chapter 11, we have added several new exercises as well as a mini-case.
• In Chapter 12, we have added several new exercises.
• In Chapter 13, we have tried to make the flow of material easier to follow. Given the more advanced concepts, we have 
tightened the linkage to the associated spreadsheets. We have also added a mini-case.
• In Chapter 14, we have added discussion of the Mumbai dabbawalas, a responsive distribution network. We have tight-
ened the linkage of examples to associated spreadsheets and added a couple of mini-cases.
• Chapter 15 has had a very significant revision, with an enhanced discussion of successful third parties as well as the 
impact of incentives and the sharing of risk and reward in the supply chain.
• Chapter 16 has a new mini-case.
• Information Technology in a Supply Chain has been updated and placed online at www.pearsoned.co.in/SunilChopra.
• Chapter 17, on sustainability, has been further developed, with a new section related to the pricing of sustainability.
• We have continued to add current examples throughout the book, with a particular focus on bringing in more global 
examples.
The goal of this class was not only to cover high-level supply chain strategy and concepts, but also to give students 
a solid understanding of the analytical tools necessary to solve supply chain problems. With this class goal in mind, our 
objective was to create a book that would develop an understanding of the following key areas and their interrelationships:
• The strategic role of a supply chain
• The key strategic drivers of supply chain performance
• Analytic methodologies for supply chain analysis
Our first objective in this book is for the reader to learn the strategic importance of good supply chain design, planning, 
and operation for every firm. The reader will be able to understand how good supply chain management can be a competi-
tive advantage, whereas weaknesses in the  supply chain can hurt the performance of a firm. We use many examples to 
illustrate this idea and develop a framework for supply chain strategy.
Within the strategic framework, we identify facilities, inventory, transportation, information, sourcing, and pric -
ing as the key drivers of supply chain performance. Our second goal in the book is to convey how these drivers may be 
used on conceptual and practical levels during supply chain design, planning, and operation to improve performance. 
We have presented a variety of cases that can be used to illustrate how a company uses various drivers to improve sup -
ply chain performance. For each driver of supply chain performance, our goal is to provide readers with practical 
managerial levers and concepts that may be used to improve supply chain performance.
Using these managerial levers requires knowledge of analytic methodologies for supply chain analysis. Our third 
goal is to give the reader an understanding of these methodologies. Every methodological discussion is illustrated with its 
application in Excel. In this discussion, we also stress the managerial context in which the methodology is used and the 
managerial levers for improvement that it supports.
The strategic frameworks and concepts discussed in the book are tied together through a variety of examples that 
show how a combination of concepts is needed to achieve significant increases in performance.

--- PAGE 19 ---
xviii Preface
ONLINE SUPPLEMENTS
Instructors can easily register to gain access to a variety of instructor resources available with this text in downloadable 
format.
The following supplements are available with this text:
• Instructor’s Solutions Manual
• Test Bank
• TestGen
® Computerized Test Bank
• PowerPoint Presentations
Chapter A: Information Technology in a Supply Chain  is available online for students.
Sunil Chopra
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
Peter Meindl
Kepos Capital
This edition of the book, retains as its principal focus , the linking of general theory of supply chain management and the 
practical experiences of businesses in the developed world with the ground realities in India, one of the world’s fastest 
growing economies. This has helped produce a text with lessons of equal value for students of the subject across the globe.
The  march of international trade towards ever-increasing spatial dispersion at both the supply and the demand ends 
has been inexorable. In the process, it has embraced not only economies at different levels of development but also 
diverse sociopolitical environments. This makes it imperative  for  the study of supply chain management to take a note 
of the challenges that such diversities throw up, and also the solutions that are emerging under the relentless competi -
tive pressures to which present-day businesses are exposed. 
The digital revolution is perhaps the most challenging and game-changing development affecting the business 
world. It has dawned on India at a time when its traditional supply chains are in a flux. This has added a new dimension 
to the transformation process, making it a fit case for lessons in the ongoing evolutionary process. An attempt has been 
made in this edition of the book to document the impact of this revolution as it unfolds.
Rooted in the Indian ethos, the case studies and examples added to this book present a different perspective, thus 
making the text multidimensional and enhancing  its practical utility for a wider readership.
Dharam Vir Kalra
Guest Faculty
Indian Institute of  Management Rohtak

--- PAGE 20 ---
 Preface xix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the many people who helped us throughout this process. We thank the reviewers whose suggestions 
significantly improved the book, including: Steven Brown, Arizona State University; Ming Chen, California State Univer-
sity, Long Beach; Sameer Kumar, University of Saint Thomas; Frank Montabon, Iowa State University; Brian Sauser, 
University of North Texas; and Paul Venderspek, Colorado State University.
We are grateful to the students at the Kellogg School of Management who suffered through typo-ridden drafts of 
earlier versions of the book. We would also like to thank our editor, Dan Tylman, and the staff at Pearson, including Liz 
Napolitano, senior production project manager; Anne Fahlgren, executive product marketing manager; Claudia Fernandes, 
program manager; and Linda Albelli, editorial assistant, for their efforts with the book. Finally, we would like to thank 
you, our readers, for reading and using this book. We hope it contributes to all your efforts to improve the performance of 
companies and supply chains throughout the world. We would be pleased to hear your comments and suggestions for 
future editions of this text.
Sunil Chopra
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
Peter Meindl
Kepos Capital
I am grateful to all the companies that have permitted me to draw upon and quote their experiences. Some of the 
notable contributions have come from M/S Mercurio Pallia, M/S Fresh and Healthy, and M/S Kale Logistics. I would like to 
thank  the authors who have graciously allowed me to incorporate their case studies and research papers in my adaptation. I 
also gratefully acknowledge the useful inputs provided to me by Mr. Enamul Haque and Naveen Kumar. I extend my 
gratitude to Professor Vivek Kumar for his encouragement and support throughout the production of this work and Dr. 
Hema Yadav for her original contribution  My special thanks are due to Mr. N K Chaudhary of Jaipur Rugs who has built 
a remarkable business model that reflects the Indian socio-economic realities. I also want to acknowledge the contribution 
of Pricewaterhouse Coopers for allowing me to reproduce the Executive Summary of their very well-researched report 
which provides a fitting finale to this edition of the book.
Dharam Vir Kalra
Guest Faculty
Indian Institute of  Management Rohtak

--- PAGE 21 ---
         This page is intentionally left blank.

--- PAGE 22 ---
I
n this chapter, we provide a conceptual understanding of what a supply chain is and the 
various issues that need to be considered when designing, planning, or operating a supply 
chain besides tracing its historical background. We discuss the significance of supply chain 
decisions and supply chain performances for the success of a firm. We also provide several 
examples from different industries to emphasize the variety of supply chain issues that compa-
nies need to consider at the strategic, planning, and operational levels.
1.1 WHAT IS A SUPPLY CHAIN?
A supply chain consists of all parties involved, directly or indirectly, in fulfilling a customer 
request. The supply chain includes not only the manufacturer and suppliers, but also transporters, 
warehouses, retailers, and even customers themselves. Within each organization, such as a manu-
facturer, the supply chain includes all functions involved in receiving and filling a customer 
request. These functions include, but are not limited to, new product development, marketing, 
operations, distribution, finance, and customer service.
Consider a customer walking into a Walmart store to purchase detergent. The supply chain 
begins with the customer and his or her need for detergent. The next stage of this supply chain is 
the Walmart retail store that the customer visits. Walmart stocks its shelves using inventory that 
Understanding the  
Supply Chain
CHAPTER  
1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
1. Understand the nature of supply chains and 
trace the historical perspectives leading to 
their development and growth.
2. Discuss the goal of a supply chain and 
explain the impact of supply chain 
decisions on the success of a firm.
3. Identify the three key supply chain 
decision phases and explain the 
significance of each one.
4. Describe the cycle and push/pull views of a 
supply chain.
5. Classify the supply chain macro processes 
in a firm.

--- PAGE 23 ---
2 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
may have been supplied from a finished-goods warehouse or a distributor using trucks supplied 
by a third party. The distributor, in turn, is stocked by the manufacturer (say, Procter & Gamble 
[P&G] in this case). The P&G manufacturing plant receives raw material from a variety of sup-
pliers, which may themselves have been supplied by lower-tier suppliers. For example, packag-
ing material may come from Pactiv Corporation, whereas Pactiv receives raw materials to 
manufacture the packaging from other suppliers. This supply chain is illustrated in Figure 1-1, 
with the arrows corresponding to the direction of physical product flow.
A supply chain is dynamic and involves the constant flow of information, product, and 
funds among different stages. In our example, Walmart provides the product, as well as pric -
ing and availability information, to the customer. The customer transfers funds to Walmart. 
Walmart conveys point-of-sales data and replenishment orders to the warehouse or distribu-
tor, which transfers the replenishment order via trucks back to the store. Walmart transfers 
funds to the distributor after the replenishment. The distributor also provides pricing infor -
mation and sends delivery schedules to Walmart. Walmart may send back packaging mate-
rial to be recycled. Similar information, material, and fund flows take place across the entire 
supply chain.
In another example, when a customer makes a purchase online from Amazon, the supply 
chain includes, among others, the customer, Amazon’s website, the Amazon warehouse, and all 
of Amazon’s suppliers and their suppliers. The website provides the customer with information 
regarding pricing, product variety, and product availability. After making a product choice, the 
customer enters the order information and pays for the product. The customer may later return 
to the website to check the status of the order. Stages further up the supply chain use customer 
order information to fill the request. That process involves an additional flow of information, 
product, and funds among various stages of the supply chain.
These examples illustrate that the customer is an integral part of the supply chain. In fact, 
the primary purpose of any supply chain is to satisfy customer needs and, in the process, generate 
profit for itself. The term supply chain conjures up images of product or supply moving from 
suppliers to manufacturers to distributors to retailers to customers along a chain. This is certainly 
part of the supply chain, but it is also important to visualize information, funds, and product 
flows along both directions of this chain. The term supply chain may also imply that only one 
player is involved at each stage. In reality, a manufacturer may receive material from several sup-
pliers and then supply several distributors. Thus, most supply chains are actually networks. It 
may be more accurate to use the term supply network or supply web to describe the structure of 
most supply chains, as shown in Figure 1-2.
CustomerWalmart
Store
Walmart
or Third 
Party DC
P&G or Other
Manufacturer
Timber
Company
Paper
Manufacturer
Pactiv
Corporation
Chemical
Manufacturer
Plastic
Producer
FIGURE 1-1 Stages of a Detergent Supply Chain

--- PAGE 24 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 3
A typical supply chain may involve a variety of stages, including the following:
• Customers
• Retailers
• Wholesalers/distributors
• Manufacturers
• Component/raw material suppliers
Each stage in a supply chain is connected through the flow of products, information, and 
funds. These flows often occur in both directions and may be managed by one of the stages or an 
intermediary. Each stage in Figure 1-2 need not be present in a supply chain. As discussed in 
Chapter 4, the appropriate design of the supply chain depends on both the customer’s needs and 
the roles played by the stages involved. For example, Dell has two supply chain structures that it 
uses to serve its customers. For its server business, Dell builds to order; that is, a customer order 
initiates manufacturing at Dell. For the sale of servers, Dell does not have a separate retailer, 
distributor, or wholesaler in the supply chain. Dell also sells consumer products such as PCs and 
tablets through retailers such as Walmart, which carry Dell products in inventory. This supply 
chain thus contains an extra stage (the retailer), compared with the direct sales model used by 
Dell for servers. In the case of other retail stores, the supply chain may also contain a wholesaler 
or distributor between the store and the manufacturer.
1.2 HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Supply chain management, as we understand it today, represents the confluence of at least 
three main streams of knowledge and practical experience of the business world, spanning 
almost 60 years. The fusion of these streams into one powerful movement, supply chain man-
agement, that is sweeping across the present-day industrial world has been brought about by 
intense competition characteristic of contemporary markets. It is, therefore, appropriate that a 
discussion on supply chain management is preceded by a brief understanding of contributing 
disciplines.
These streams include business processes and managerial practices, which have evolved 
somewhat unconnectedly, if not entirely independently, in the fields of operations management, 
Supplier Distributor Retailer CustomerManufacturer
Supplier Distributor Retailer CustomerManufacturer
Supplier Distributor Retailer CustomerManufacturer
FIGURE 1-2 Supply Chain Stages

--- PAGE 25 ---
4 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
industrial engineering, and physical distribution. In the course of their development, these pro-
cesses and practices have absorbed several allied and subsidiary functions as well as activities, 
and adopted various successful business innovations.
The three principal streams are:
• Sourcing, procurement, and supply management
• Materials management
• Logistics and distribution
Sourcing, Procurement, and Supply Management
Commonly, though quite mistakenly referred to as supply chain management, these functions 
arose in the area of purchasing which came to occupy a predominant position in businesses 
because of their impact on cash flow and contribution towards the company profitability. Busi -
nesses realized that efforts required to increase profits through increasing sales were far greater 
than those involved in generating equivalent returns through reduction in procurement prices.
1 
Major purchases came to be handled by the top management who in turn depended on purchase 
specialists for advice. Economic buying was seen to be a strategic function, with major contri-
bution to bottom-line. The responsibilities of the purchase function, however, ended with the 
procurement and a more mundane function of materials management took over. We may, thus, 
regard it as the set of activities, functions, and processes concerned with economic procurement 
and inflow of inputs
2 into the enterprise and an efficient control over flow of funds out of the 
company.
In the context of supply chain management, these processes fall under sourcing, supply 
side management, inbound logistics, and supplier relationship management together with mate-
rials, information, and cash flows interconnected with each other. 
Materials Management
Classic materials management included the functions of forecasting, inventory management, 
stores management, warehousing, stock keeping, and scheduling till it came to include pro-
duction planning and production control,  to evolve into extended materials management. 
With subsequent inclusion of order processing in its fold, it came to be known as integrated 
materials management. Since materials constitute almost 60 per cent of the cost of most 
manufactured products,
3 at least in the Indian context, the importance of efficient manage-
ment of materials came to be recognized by businesses during the 1970s as the route to cost 
reduction and thereby to profitability. The merger of purchasing, which presented opportuni-
ties for reduction in the cost of material inputs, with materials management, thus became an 
obvious business compulsion. Some of the most innovative techniques focusing on reducing 
total cost of inventories to the lowest possible levels without compromising on service levels, 
owe their origin and growth to this stream of knowledge and experience. In relation to supply 
chain management, it may be regarded as the management of flow of material into, through, 
and out of an enterprise, adding in the process, value for the customers both internal and 
external to the organization.
1 In food industry, for instance, where logistics costs are of the order of 60 percent, a company would need to generate 
additional sales to the tune of ` 4 to derive the same profits as it would, if it manages to reduce the procurement price by 
Re. 1, presuming that it is working on a net profit margin of 10 percent.
2 In its classic interpretation, purchasing function does not cover procurement of capital, personnel, data, and proprietary 
rights such as licenses and patents. Integrated Materials Management: Definitions, Functions, and Activities. Robert 
Fieten. Published by German Federal Association of Materials Management.
3 With possible exception of some electronic goods incorporating innovative frontier technologies.

--- PAGE 26 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 5
Logistics and Distribution
Derived from military parlance,4 wherein it covered all functions related to movement and main-
tenance of armies, the logistics function in its business application came to be recognized as 
time- and space-related placement of goods to provide improved customer service. According to 
the Council of Logistics Management, it is that part of the supply chain management process that 
plans, implements, and controls the efficient, effective, forward, and reverse flow and storage of 
goods, services, and related information between the point of origin and the point of consump-
tion in order to meet customers’ requirements. The distribution function, which Peter Drucker 
identified as the “Today’s Frontier”,
5 is, in that sense, synonymous with Logistics.
Since transportation, which is the backbone of logistics, accounts for up to 50 per cent of 
total logistics costs, the efficient management of this function became an important preoccupa-
tion of management leading to the development of transportation-related practices involving all 
modes, in general and multimodal transport, in particular as evidenced by revolutionary develop-
ment and exponential growth of containerized cargo handling and movement worldwide. Real-
ization, on the part of businesses, that there was an obvious trade-off between transportation 
choices and inventory policies led to integration, and logistics emerged as a cross-functional 
approach that integrates all materials, functions of purchasing, inventory management, produc-
tion control, inbound traffic, warehousing, and store keeping as well as incoming quality control 
with the objective of ensuring efficient operations. In this shape, business logistics may be 
regarded as the early avatar of supply chain management.
In the context of supply chain management, logistics would fall at both ends, that is, 
inbound logistics and outbound logistics. Interestingly, the intracompany flow of materials is 
sometimes referred to as manufacturing logistics, giving this discipline a breadth of reach over 
end-to-end movement of materials at all stages of industrial and business endeavor in delivering 
value to customer. Supply chain management has thus emerged as an integrative philosophy and 
a strategic-level business practice which encompasses flow of materials, funds, and information 
throughout the network that ultimately delivers value to the customer.
1.3 THE OBJECTIVE OF A SUPPLY CHAIN
The objective of every supply chain should be to maximize the overall value generated. The 
value (also known as supply chain surplus) a supply chain generates is the difference between 
what the value of the final product is to the customer and the costs the supply chain incurs in fill-
ing the customer’s request.
Supply Chain Surplus = Customer Value – Supply Chain Cost
The value of the final product may vary for each customer and can be estimated by the maximum 
amount the customer is willing to pay for it. The difference between the value of the product and its 
price remains with the customer as consumer surplus. The amount of consumer surplus, a concept 
expounded in welfare economics, has always been difficult to determine precisely in monetary 
terms as it is not clearly measurable as to how much a customer was eventually willing to pay for a 
product or service vis-a-vis what he actually paid. The estimates are subjective and would vary 
from person to person and situation to situation. A person in dire need of a product or service in an 
extreme situation may be willing to pay any price if he has no other alternative. A man stranded in 
a desert without water may be willing to give away his entire estate for a glass of water.
However, there is one area in which this figure does become measurable and that is through 
the difference in prices between branded and generic drugs which provide equal relief or deliver 
4 First used by Henri Jomini during mid 19th Century to cover the art of moving and marinating armies.
5 “Physical distribution is today’s frontier in business. It is one area where managerial results of great magnitude can be
achieved and is still largely unexplored.” Peter Drucker.

--- PAGE 27 ---
6 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
equal value to the patient. As the price differential between the patented drugs and their generic 
versions is substantial, and as both ostensibly provide equal value to the patient, we can measure, 
fairly precisely, the difference in costs of the two and regard it as consumer surplus.
Naturally, the higher the consumer surplus the more attractive the product or service. This 
is what is accounting for the exponential growth in Indian Generic Drugs industry.
We will cover this phenomenon through as case study at the end of the chapter.
The rest of the supply chain surplus becomes supply chain profitability, the difference 
between the revenue generated from the customer and the overall cost across the supply chain. 
For example, a customer purchasing a wireless router from Best Buy pays $60, which represents 
the revenue the supply chain receives. Customers who purchase the router clearly value it at or 
above $60. Thus, part of the supply chain surplus is left with the customer as consumer surplus. 
The rest stays with the supply chain as profit. Best Buy and other stages of the supply chain incur 
costs to convey information, produce components, store them, transport them, transfer funds, and 
so on. The difference between the $60 that the customer paid and the sum of all costs incurred by 
the supply chain to produce and distribute the router represents the supply chain profitability. 
Supply chain profitability is the total profit to be shared across all supply chain stages and inter-
mediaries. The higher the supply chain profitability, the more successful is the supply chain. For 
most profit-making supply chains, the supply chain surplus will be strongly correlated with prof-
its. Supply chain success should be measured in terms of supply chain profitability and not in 
terms of the profits at an individual stage. (In subsequent chapters, we see that a focus on profit-
ability at individual stages may lead to a reduction in overall supply chain profits.) A focus on 
growing the supply chain surplus pushes all members of the supply chain toward growing the 
size of the overall pie.
Having defined the success of a supply chain in terms of supply chain profitability, the next 
logical step is to look for sources of value, revenue, and cost. For any supply chain, there is only 
one source of revenue: the customer. The value obtained by a customer purchasing detergent at 
Wal-Mart depends upon several factors, including the functionality of the detergent, how far the 
customer has to travel to Wal-Mart, and the likelihood of finding the detergent in stock. The cus-
tomer is the only one providing positive cash flow for the Wal-Mart supply chain. All other cash 
flows are simply fund exchanges that occur within the supply chain, given that different stages 
have different owners. When Wal-Mart pays its supplier, it is taking a portion of the funds the 
customer provides and passing that money on to the supplier. All flows of information, product, 
or funds generate costs within the supply chain. Thus, the appropriate management of these 
flows is a key to supply chain success. Effective supply chain management involves the manage-
ment of supply chain assets and product, information, and fund flows to maximize total supply 
chain surplus. A growth in supply chain surplus increases the size of the total pie, allowing con-
tributing members of the supply chain to benefit.
In this book, we have a strong focus on analyzing all supply chain decisions in terms of 
their impact on the supply chain surplus. These decisions and their impact can vary for a wide 
variety of reasons. For instance, consider the difference in the supply chain structure for fastmov-
ing consumer goods observed in the United States and India. U.S. distributors play a much 
smaller role in this supply chain compared to their Indian counterparts. We argue that the differ-
ence in supply chain structure can be explained by the impact a distributor has on the supply 
chain surplus in the two countries.
Retailing in the United States is largely consolidated, with large chains buying consumer 
goods from most manufacturers. This consolidation gives retailers sufficient scale that the intro-
duction of an intermediary such as a distributor does little to reduce costs and may actually 
increase costs because of an additional transaction.
In contrast, India has millions of small retail outlets. The small size of Indian retail outlets 
limits the amount of inventory they can hold, thus requiring frequent replenishment—an order 

--- PAGE 28 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 7
can be compared with the weekly grocery shopping for a family in the United States. The only 
way for a manufacturer to keep transportation costs low is to bring full truckloads of product 
close to the market and then distribute locally using “milk runs” with smaller vehicles. The pres-
ence of an intermediary who can receive a full truckload shipment, break bulk, and then make 
smaller deliveries to the retailers is crucial if transportation costs are to be kept low. Most Indian 
distributors are one-stop shops, stocking everything from cooking oil to soaps and detergents 
made by a variety of manufacturers. Besides the convenience provided by one-stop shopping, 
distributors in India are also able to reduce transportation costs for outbound delivery to the 
retailer by aggregating products across multiple manufacturers during the delivery runs. Dis-
tributors in India also handle collections, because their cost of collection is significantly lower 
than that of each manufacturer collecting from retailers on its own would be. Thus, the important 
role of distributors in India can be explained by the growth in supply chain surplus that results 
from their presence.
Most traditional supply chains presently existing in India, operate what approximates to a 
multi echelon distribution model in which supplies move from the suppliers and manufacturers 
through a series of large and small stockholders and intermediaries to reach the customers right 
down to remote villages in which most of the Indian population resides and which are not always 
well connected. National-, regional-, state-, district-, and local-level stockiest constitute links in 
the chain replenishing and getting replenished, normally through a wide variety of surface trans-
portation in an interconnected network, creating in the process inventories at each stage. The 
dynamics of such supply chains differ quite considerably from the IT-enabled supply chains 
serving well-developed and well-connected urban markets through organized retailing. The sup-
ply chain surplus argument implies that as retailing in India begins to consolidate, the role of 
distributors will diminish.
1.4 THE IMPORTANCE OF SUPPLY CHAIN DECISIONS
There is a close connection between the design and management of supply chain flows (prod-
uct, information, and funds) and the success of a supply chain. Walmart, Amazon, and Seven-
Eleven Japan are examples of companies that have built their success on superior design, 
planning, and operation of their supply chain. In contrast, the failure of many online busi-
nesses, such as Webvan, can be attributed to weaknesses in their supply chain design and plan -
ning. The rise and subsequent fall of the bookstore chain Borders illustrates how a failure to 
adapt its supply chain to a changing environment and customer expectations hurt its perfor -
mance. Dell Computer is another example of a company that had to revise its supply chain 
design in response to changing technology and customer needs. We discuss these examples 
later in this section.
Walmart has been a leader at using supply chain design, planning, and operation to achieve 
success. From its beginning, the company invested heavily in transportation and information 
infrastructure to facilitate the effective flow of goods and information. Walmart designed its sup-
ply chain with clusters of stores around distribution centers to facilitate frequent replenishment at 
its retail stores in a cost-effective manner. Frequent replenishment allows stores to match supply 
and demand more effectively than the competition. Walmart has been a leader in sharing infor -
mation and collaborating with suppliers to bring down costs and improve product availability. 
The results are impressive. In its 2013 annual report, the company reported a net income of about 
$17 billion on revenues of about $469 billion. These are dramatic results for a company that 
reached annual sales of only $1 billion in 1980. The growth in sales represents an annual com-
pounded growth rate of more than 20 percent.
Seven-Eleven Japan is another example of a company that has used excellent supply chain 
design, planning, and operation to drive growth and profitability. It has used a very responsive 

--- PAGE 29 ---
8 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
replenishment system along with an outstanding information system to ensure that products are 
available when and where customers need them. Its responsiveness allows it to change the mer -
chandising mix at each store by time of day to precisely match customer demand. As a result, the 
company has grown from sales of 1 billion yen in 1974 to almost 1.9 trillion yen in 2013, with 
profits in 2013 totaling 222 billion yen.
The failure of many online businesses, such as Webvan and Kozmo, can be attributed 
to their inability to design appropriate supply chains or manage supply chain flows effec-
tively. Webvan designed a supply chain with large warehouses in several major cities in the 
United States, from which groceries were delivered to customers’ homes. This supply chain 
design could not compete with traditional supermarket supply chains in terms of cost. Tradi -
tional supermarket chains bring product to a supermarket close to the consumer using full 
truckloads, resulting in very low transportation costs. They turn their inventory relatively 
quickly and let the customer perform most of the picking activity in the store. In contrast, 
Webvan turned its inventory marginally faster than supermarkets but incurred much higher 
transportation costs for home delivery, as well as high labor costs to pick customer orders. 
The result was a company that folded in 2001, within two years of a very successful initial 
public offering.
As the experience of Borders illustrates, a failure to adapt supply chains to a changing 
environment can significantly hurt performance. Borders, along with Barnes & Noble, domi-
nated the selling of books and music in the 1990s by implementing the superstore concept. 
Compared with small local bookstores that dominated the industry prior to that, Borders was 
able to offer greater variety (about 100,000 titles at superstores, relative to fewer than 10,000 
titles at a local bookstore) to customers at a lower cost by aggregating operations in large stores. 
This allowed the company to achieve higher inventory turns than local bookstores with lower 
operating costs per dollar of sales. In 2004, Borders achieved sales of almost $4 billion, with 
profits of $132 million. Its model, however, was already under attack with the growth of  
Amazon, which offered much greater variety than Borders at lower cost by selling online and 
stocking its inventories in a few distribution centers. Borders’ inability to adapt its supply chain 
to compete with Amazon led to a rapid decline. By 2009, sales had dropped to $2.8 billion; the 
company lost $109 million that year.
Dell is another example of a company that enjoyed tremendous success based on its sup -
ply chain design, planning, and operation but then had to adapt its supply chain in response to 
shifts in technology and customer expectations. Between 1993 and 2006, Dell experienced 
unprecedented growth of both revenue and profits by structuring a supply chain that provided 
customers with customized PCs quickly and at reasonable cost. By 2006, Dell had a net income 
of more than $3.5 billion on revenues of just over $56 billion. This success was based on two 
key supply chain features that supported rapid, low-cost customization. The first was Dell’s 
decision to sell directly to the end customer, bypassing distributors and retailers. The second 
key aspect of Dell’s supply chain was the centralization of manufacturing and inventories in a 
few locations where final assembly was postponed until the customer order arrived. As a result, 
Dell was able to provide a large variety of PC configurations while keeping low levels of com-
ponent inventories
Key Point
Supply chain design, planning, and operation decisions play a significant role in the success or failure of 
a firm. To stay competitive, supply chains must adapt to changing technology and customer expectations.
In spite of this tremendous success, the changing marketplace presented some new 
challenges for Dell. Whereas Dell’s supply chain was well suited for highly customized PCs, 
the market shifted to lower levels of customization. Given the growing power of hardware, 

--- PAGE 30 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 9
customers were satisfied with a few model types. Dell reacted by adjusting its supply chain 
with regard to both direct selling and building to order. The company started selling its PCs 
through retail chains such as Walmart in the United States and GOME in China. It also out-
sourced a large fraction of its assembly to low-cost locations, effectively building to stock 
rather than to customer order. Unlike Borders, Dell is making a significant effort to adapt its 
supply chain to changing times. It remains to be seen whether these changes will improve 
Dell’s performance.
In the next section, we categorize supply chain decision phases based on the frequency 
with which they are made and the time frame they take into account.
1.5 DECISION PHASES IN A SUPPLY CHAIN
Successful supply chain management requires many decisions relating to the flow of informa-
tion, product, and funds. Each decision should be made to raise the supply chain surplus. These 
decisions fall into three categories or phases, depending on the frequency of each decision and 
the time frame during which a decision phase has an impact. As a result, each category of deci-
sions must consider uncertainty over the decision horizon.
1. Supply chain strategy or design: During this phase, a company decides how to 
structure the supply chain over the next several years. It decides what the chain’s configuration 
will be, how resources will be allocated, and what processes each stage will perform. Strategic 
decisions made by companies include whether to outsource or perform a supply chain function 
in-house, the location and capacities of production and warehousing facilities, the products to 
be manufactured or stored at various locations, the modes of transportation to be made available 
along different shipping legs, and the type of information system to be used. PepsiCo Inc.’s 
decision in 2009 to purchase two of its largest bottlers is a supply chain design or strategic deci-
sion. A firm must ensure that the supply chain configuration supports its strategic objectives and 
increases the supply chain surplus during this phase. As the PepsiCo CEO announced in a news 
release on August 4, “while the existing model has served the system very well, the fully inte-
grated beverage business will enable us to bring innovative products and packages to market 
faster, streamline our manufacturing and distribution systems and react more quickly to changes 
in the marketplace.” Supply chain design decisions are typically made for the long term (a mat -
ter of years) and are expensive to alter on short notice. Consequently, when companies make 
these decisions, they must take into account uncertainty in anticipated market conditions over 
the following few years.
It is nevertheless important that companies continually revisit their supply chain strate-
gies and make necessary mid-course corrections to realign themselves with the changing mar -
ket conditions, technological development, and consumer preferences. This is particularly 
important in case of countries where the adoption of IT tools and emergence of e-commerce 
are impacting the traditional supply chains, and those that are in the process of moving into the 
organised sector, equally. In this context, developments in the Indian Retail industry where 
both kiranas (traditional grocery stores) and shopping malls are being impacted by the grow-
ing consumer preference for online shopping, hold some useful lessons. Shopping malls, 
which were threatening the traditional kiranas are now themselves being threatened by the 
‘e-tailers’ as seen from the fact that the footfalls in the brick and mortar malls have dropped 
considerably. This has resulted in a large number of malls in metropolitan cities to close down 
and many others to reshape themselves into office spaces for alternative uses. Reliance Retail 
and Reliance Fresh Direct are both aggressively promoting ‘e-tailing’ and launching their own 
E commerce portals to create both an online and offline presence. Kiranas too are adopting IT 
tools to provide more responsive customer service. Some of the larger ‘e-tailers’ are consider -
ing taking the local kiranas under their wings and use them for better performance and last 

--- PAGE 31 ---
10 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
mile deliveries due to their proximity to consumers. These changes in supply chain designs 
and strategies are likely to throw up at least a few India specific distribution system in the near 
future. 
In this context, Amazon India’s  pilot project “Kirana Now” which aims to deliver the 
ordered goods within two to four hours from the IT enabled neighbourhood  Kirana stores  using 
their staff supported by its own logistics services, seems to present a solution likely to succeed in 
the Indian scenario.
Strategic Changes are also underway in the Indian Generic Drugs industry where the divi-
sion between the Chronic Therapy and Acute Therapy range of drugs  is becoming sharper with 
more and more firms migrating  from the later to the former. This is a strategic shift to avail 
higher profit margins rather than operating in a highly competitive environment in the Acute 
Therapy range where low price leadership strategy seems to operate. Sun Pharma, Doctor Red-
dy’s Laboratories Limited, Cipla, and Lupin have chosen to concentrate on the chronic Therapy 
Range dealing in limited number of drugs with high profit margins. This shift supports the belief 
that Low Price Leadership Strategy has its limitations and cannot be sustained over prolonged 
periods.
2. Supply chain planning: For decisions made during this phase, the time frame 
 considered is a quarter to a year. Therefore, the supply chain’s configuration determined in the 
 strategic phase is fixed. This configuration establishes constraints within which planning must be 
done. The goal of planning is to maximize the supply chain surplus that can be generated over 
the planning horizon given the constraints established during the strategic or design phase. 
 Companies start the planning phase with a forecast for the coming year (or a comparable time 
frame) of demand and other factors, such as costs and prices in different markets. Planning 
includes making decisions regarding which markets will be supplied from which locations, the 
subcontracting of manufacturing, the inventory policies to be followed, and the timing and size 
of marketing and price  promotions. For example, steel giant ArcelorMittal’s decisions regarding 
markets supplied by a production facility and target production quantities at each location are 
classified as planning  decisions. In the planning phase, companies must include uncertainty in 
demand, exchange rates, and competition over this time horizon in their decisions. Given a 
shorter time frame and better forecasts than in the design phase, companies in the planning phase 
try to incorporate any  flexibility built into the supply chain in the design phase and exploit it to 
optimize performance. As a result of the planning phase, companies define a set of operating 
policies that govern short-term operations.
3. Supply chain operation: The time horizon here is weekly or daily. During this phase, 
companies make decisions regarding individual customer orders. At the operational level, supply 
chain configuration is considered fixed and planning policies are already defined. The goal of 
supply chain operations is to handle incoming customer orders in the best possible manner. Dur-
ing this phase, firms allocate inventory or production to individual orders, set a date by which an 
order is to be filled, generate pick lists at a warehouse, allocate an order to a particular shipping 
mode and shipment, set delivery schedules of trucks, and place replenishment orders. Because 
operational decisions are being made in the short term (minutes, hours, or days), there is less 
uncertainty about demand information. Given the constraints established by the configuration 
and planning policies, the goal during the operation phase is to exploit the reduction of uncer -
tainty and optimize performance.
The design, planning, and operation of a supply chain have a strong impact on overall prof-
itability and success. It is fair to state that a large part of the success of firms such as Walmart and 
Seven-Eleven Japan can be attributed to their effective supply chain design, planning, and operation.
In later chapters, we develop concepts and present methodologies that can be used at each 
of the three decision phases described earlier. Most of our discussion addresses the supply chain 
design and planning phases.

--- PAGE 32 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 11
Key Point
Supply chain decision phases may be categorized as design, planning, or operational, depending on the 
time frame during which the decisions made apply. Design decisions constrain or enable good planning, 
which in turn constrains or enables effective operation.
1.6 PROCESS VIEWS OF A SUPPLY CHAIN
A supply chain is a sequence of processes and flows that take place within and between different 
stages and combine to fill a customer need for a product. There are two ways to view the pro-
cesses performed in a supply chain.
 1. Cycle View: The processes in a supply chain are divided into a series of cycles, each 
performed at the interface between two successive stages of the supply chain.
 2. Push/Pull View: The processes in a supply chain are divided into two categories, 
depending on whether they are executed in response to a customer order or in anticipation 
of customer orders. Pull processes are initiated by a customer order, whereas push  
 processes are initiated and performed in anticipation of customer orders.
Cycle View of Supply Chain Processes
Given the five stages of a supply chain as shown in Figure 1-2, all supply chain processes can be 
broken down into the following four process cycles, as shown in Figure 1-3:
• Customer order cycle
• Replenishment cycle
• Manufacturing cycle
• Procurement cycle
Customer Order Cycle
Replenishment Cycle
Manufacturing Cycle
Procurement Cycle
Customer
Distributor
Manufacturer
Supplier
Retailer
FIGURE 1-3 Supply Chain Process Cycles

--- PAGE 33 ---
12 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
Each cycle occurs at the interface between two successive stages of the supply chain. Not 
every supply chain will have all four cycles clearly separated. For example, a grocery supply 
chain in which a retailer stocks finished-goods inventories and places replenishment orders with 
a distributor is likely to have all four cycles separated. Dell, in contrast, bypasses the retailer and 
distributor when it sells servers directly to customers.
Each cycle consists of six subprocesses, as shown in Figure 1-4. Each cycle starts with the 
supplier marketing the product to customers. A buyer then places an order that is received by 
the supplier. The supplier supplies the order, which is received by the buyer. The buyer may 
return some of the product or other recycled material to the supplier or a third party. The cycle 
of activities then begins again. The subprocesses in Figure 1-4 can be linked to the source, 
make, deliver, and return processes in the supply chain operations reference (SCOR) model. 
The SCOR model provides a description of supply chain processes, a framework for relation -
ships between these processes, and a set of metrics to measure process performance. The 
description of the supply chain in the SCOR model is similar to the cycle view of supply chains 
discussed in this section.
Depending on the transaction in question, the subprocesses in Figure 1-4 can be applied to 
the appropriate cycle. When customers shop online at Amazon, they are part of the customer 
order cycle—with the customer as the buyer and Amazon as the supplier. In contrast, when  
Amazon orders books from a distributor to replenish its inventory, it is part of the replenishment 
cycle—with Amazon as the buyer and the distributor as the supplier.
Within each cycle, the goal of the buyer is to ensure product availability and to achieve 
economies of scale in ordering. The supplier attempts to forecast customer orders and 
reduce the cost of receiving the order. The supplier then works to fill the order on time and 
improve efficiency and accuracy of the order fulfillment process. The buyer then works to 
reduce the cost of the receiving process. Reverse flows are managed to reduce cost and meet 
environmental objectives.
Even though each cycle has the same basic subprocesses, there are a few important differ-
ences among the cycles. In the customer order cycle, demand is external to the supply chain and 
thus is uncertain. In all other cycles, order placement is uncertain but can be projected based on 
policies followed by the particular supply chain stage. For example, in the procurement cycle, a 
tire supplier to an automotive manufacturer can predict tire demand precisely once the produc-
tion schedule at the manufacturer is known. The second difference across cycles relates to the 
scale of an order. A customer buys a single car, but the dealer orders multiple cars at a time from 
the manufacturer, and the manufacturer, in turn, orders an even larger quantity of tires from the 
supplier. As we move from the customer to the supplier, the number of individual orders declines 
Supplier stage
markets product
Buyer returns reverse
/f_lows to supplier or
third party
Buyer stage places
order
Buyer stage
receives supply
Supplier stage
receives order
Supplier stage
supplies order
FIGURE 1-4 Subprocesses in Each Supply Chain Process Cycle

--- PAGE 34 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 13
and the size of each order increases. Thus, sharing of information and operating policies across 
supply chain stages becomes more important as we move further from the end customer.
The detailed process description of a supply chain in the cycle view is useful when consid-
ering operational decisions because it clearly specifies the roles of each member of the supply 
chain. The cycle view is used by enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems to support supply 
chain operations.
Key Point
A cycle view of the supply chain clearly defines the processes involved and the owners of each process. 
This view is useful when considering operational decisions because it specifies the roles and responsi-
bilities of each member of the supply chain and the desired outcome for each process.
Push/Pull View of Supply Chain Processes
All processes in a supply chain fall into one of two categories, depending on the timing of their 
execution relative to end customer demand. With pull processes, execution is initiated in response 
to a customer order. With push processes, execution is initiated in anticipation of customer orders 
based on a forecast. Pull processes may also be referred to as reactive processes because they react 
to customer demand. Push processes may also be referred to as speculative processes because 
they respond to speculated (or forecasted), rather than actual, demand. The push/pull boundary in 
a supply chain separates push processes from pull processes, as shown in Figure 1-5. Push pro-
cesses operate in an uncertain environment because customer demand is not yet known. Pull pro-
cesses operate in an environment in which customer demand is known. They are, however, often 
constrained by inventory and capacity decisions that were made in the push phase.
Let us compare a make-to-stock environment like that of L. L. Bean and a build-to-order 
environment like that of Ethan Allen to compare the push/pull view and the cycle view.
L. L. Bean executes all processes in the customer order cycle after the customer order 
arrives. All processes that are part of the customer order cycle are thus pull processes.  
Order  fulfillment takes place from product in inventory that is built up in anticipation of  customer 
orders. The goal of the replenishment cycle is to ensure product availability when a customer 
order arrives. All processes in the replenishment cycle are performed in anticipation of demand 
and are thus push processes. The same holds true for processes in the manufacturing and 
Process
N
Process
N /H11002 1
Process
k /H11001 1
Process
3
Push/Pull Boundary
Customer Order Arrives
Push Processes
Process 
1
Pull Processes
Process
2
Process
k
FIGURE 1-5 Push/Pull View of the Supply Chain

--- PAGE 35 ---
14 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
 procurement cycles. In fact, raw material such as fabric is often purchased six to nine months 
before customer demand is expected. Manufacturing itself begins three to six months before the 
point of sale. The processes in the L. L. Bean supply chain break up into pull and push processes, 
as shown in Figure 1-6.
Ethan Allen makes customized furniture, such as sofas and chairs, for which customers 
select the fabric and finish. In this case, the arrival of a customer order triggers production of the 
product. The manufacturing cycle is thus part of the customer order fulfillment process in the 
customer order cycle. There are effectively only two cycles in the Ethan Allen supply chain for 
customized furniture: (1) a customer order and manufacturing cycle and (2) a procurement cycle, 
as shown in Figure 1-7.
Customer Order Cycle
Replenishment and 
Manufacturing Cycle
Procurement Cycle
Customer
L. L. Bean
Manufacturer
Supplier
Customer 
Order Cycle
Procurement,
Manufacturing,
Replenishment 
Cycles
PULL
PROCESSES
PUSH
PROCESSES
Customer
Order 
Arrives
FIGURE 1-6 Push/Pull Processes for the L. L. Bean Supply Chain
Customer Order and 
Manufacturing Cycle
Procurement
Cycle
Customer 
Order and 
Manufacturing
Cycle
Procurement
Cycle
PULL
PROCESSES
PUSH
PROCESSES
Customer
Order 
Arrives
FIGURE 1-7 Push/Pull Processes for Ethan Allen Supply Chain for Customized 
Furniture

--- PAGE 36 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 15
All processes in the customer order and manufacturing cycle at Ethan Allen are clas-
sified as pull processes because they are initiated by customer order arrival. The company, 
however, does not place component orders in response to a customer order. Inventory is 
replenished in anticipation of customer demand. All processes in the procurement cycle 
for Ethan Allen are thus classified as push processes, because they are in response to a 
forecast.
Key Point
A push/pull view of the supply chain categorizes processes based on whether they are initiated in 
response to a customer order (pull) or in anticipation of a customer order (push). This view is useful 
when considering strategic decisions relating to supply chain design.
A push/pull view of the supply chain is very useful when considering strategic deci-
sions relating to supply chain design. The goal is to identify an appropriate push/pull bound-
ary such that the supply chain can match supply and demand effectively.
The paint industry provides another excellent example of the gains from suitably 
adjusting the push/pull boundary. The manufacture of paint requires production of the base, 
mixing of suitable colors, and packing. Until the 1980s, all these processes were performed 
in large factories, and paint cans were shipped to stores. These qualified as push processes, 
as they were performed to a forecast in anticipation of customer demand. Given the uncer -
tainty of demand, though, the paint supply chain had great difficulty matching supply and 
demand. In the 1990s, paint supply chains were restructured so mixing of colors was done at 
retail stores after customers placed their orders. In other words, color mixing was shifted 
from the push to the pull phase of the supply chain even though base preparation and pack -
ing of cans were still performed in the push phase. The result is that customers are always 
able to get the color of their choice, whereas total paint inventories across the supply chain 
have declined.
Supply Chain Macro Processes in a Firm
All supply chain processes discussed in the two process views and throughout this book can be 
classified into the following three macro processes, as shown in Figure 1-8:
 1. Customer Relationship Management (CRM): All processes at the interface between the 
firm and its customers
 2. Internal Supply Chain Management (ISCM): All processes that are internal to the firm
 3. Supplier Relationship Management (SRM): All processes at the interface between the 
firm and its suppliers
SRM ISCM CRM
CustomerFirmSupplier
 Market
 Price
 Sell
 Call Center
 Order Management
 Strategic Planning
 Demand Planning
 Supply Planning
 Ful/f_illment
 Field Service
 Source
 Negotiate
 Buy
 Design Collaboration
 Supply Collaboration
FIGURE 1-8 Supply Chain Macro Processes

--- PAGE 37 ---
16 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
Key Point
Within a firm, all supply chain activities belong to one of three macro processes: CRM, ISCM, and 
SRM. Integration among the three macro processes is crucial for successful supply chain management.
These three macro processes manage the flow of information, product, and funds 
required to generate, receive, and fulfill a customer request. The CRM macro process aims 
to generate customer demand and facilitate the placement and tracking of orders. It includes 
processes such as marketing, pricing, sales, order management, and call center management. 
At an industrial distributor such as W.W. Grainger, CRM processes include the preparation 
of catalogs and other marketing materials, management of the website, and management of 
the call center that takes orders and provides service. The ISCM macro process aims to ful-
fill demand generated by the CRM process in a timely manner and at the lowest possible 
cost. ISCM processes include the planning of internal production and storage capacity, prep-
aration of demand and supply plans, and fulfillment of actual orders. At W.W. Grainger, 
ISCM processes include planning for the location and size of warehouses; deciding which 
products to carry at each warehouse; preparing inventory management policies; and picking, 
packing, and shipping actual orders. The SRM macro process aims to arrange for and man-
age supply sources for various goods and services. SRM processes include the evaluation 
and selection of suppliers, negotiation of supply terms, and communication regarding new 
products and orders with suppliers. At W.W. Grainger, SRM processes include the selection 
of suppliers for various products, negotiation of pricing and delivery terms with suppliers, 
sharing of demand and supply plans with suppliers, and the placement of replenishment 
orders.
Observe that all three macro processes are aimed at serving the same customer. For a sup-
ply chain to be successful, it is crucial that the three macro processes are well integrated. The 
importance of this integration is discussed in Chapter 10. The organizational structure of the firm 
has a strong influence on the success or failure of the integration effort. In many firms, marketing 
is in charge of the CRM macro process, manufacturing handles the ISCM macro process, and 
purchasing oversees the SRM macro process—with little communication among them. It is not 
unusual for marketing and manufacturing to have different forecasts when making their plans. 
This lack of integration hurts the supply chain’s ability to match supply and demand effectively, 
leading to dissatisfied customers and high costs. Thus, firms should structure a supply chain 
organization that mirrors the macro processes and ensures good communication and coordina-
tion among the owners of processes that interact with one another.
1.7 EXAMPLES OF SUPPLY CHAINS
In this section, we consider several supply chains and raise questions that must be answered dur-
ing their design, planning, and operation phases. In later chapters, we discuss concepts and pres-
ent methodologies that can be used to answer these questions.
Gateway and Apple: Two Different Journeys into Retailing
Gateway was founded in 1985 as a direct sales manufacturer of PCs with no retail footprint. In 
1996, Gateway was one of the first PC manufacturers to start selling PCs online. After many 
years of selling its PCs without a retail infrastructure, however, Gateway introduced an aggres-
sive strategy of opening Gateway retail stores throughout the United States in the late 1990s. Its 
stores carried no finished-goods inventory and were primarily focused on helping customers 
select the right configuration to purchase. All PCs were manufactured to order and shipped to the 
customer from one of the assembly plants.

--- PAGE 38 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 17
Initially, investors rewarded Gateway for this strategy and raised the stock price to more 
than $80 per share in late 1999. However, this success did not last. By November 2002, 
 Gateway shares had dropped to less than $4, and Gateway was losing a significant amount of 
money. By April 2004, Gateway had closed all its retail outlets and reduced the number of 
configurations offered to customers. In August 2007, Gateway was purchased by Taiwan’s 
Acer for $710 million. By 2010, Gateway computers were sold through more than 20  different 
retail outlets, including Best Buy and Costco. As one can imagine, this was quite a transition 
for the company to experience.
In contrast, Apple has enjoyed tremendous success since it opened its first retail store in 
2001. By 2013, Apple had more than 415 stores worldwide, with sales of over $20 billion. Unlike 
Gateway, Apple has always carried product inventory at its stores. Given its product designs, 
Apple carries relatively little variety in its stores. In 2012, average revenue per Apple retail store 
was $51.5 million, a 19 percent increase over 2011.
The following questions highlight supply chain decisions that have a bearing on the differ-
ence between Apple’s and Gateway’s performance:
 1. Why did Gateway choose not to carry any finished-product inventory at its retail stores? 
Why did Apple choose to carry inventory at its stores?
 2. Should a firm with an investment in retail stores carry any finished-goods inventory? What 
are the characteristics of products that are most suitable to be carried in finished-goods 
inventory? What characterizes products that are best manufactured to order?
 3. How does product variety affect the level of inventory a retail store must carry?
 4. Is a direct selling supply chain without retail stores always less expensive than a supply 
chain with retail stores?
 5. What factors explain the success of Apple retail and the failure of Gateway country stores?
Zara: Apparel Manufacturing and Retail
Zara is a chain of fashion stores owned by Inditex, Spain’s largest apparel manufacturer and 
retailer. In 2012, Inditex reported sales of about 16 billion euros from more than 6,000 retail 
outlets in about 86 countries. In an industry in which customer demand is fickle, Zara has grown 
rapidly with a strategy to be highly responsive to changing trends with affordable prices. Whereas 
design-to-sales cycle times in the apparel industry have traditionally averaged more than  
six months, Zara has achieved cycle times of four to six weeks. This speed allows Zara to 
 introduce new designs every week and to change 75 percent of its merchandise display every 
three to four weeks. Thus, Zara’s products on display match customer preferences much more 
closely than do those of the competition. The result is that Zara sells most of its products at full 
price and has about half the markdowns in its stores compared with the competition.
Zara manufactures its apparel using a combination of flexible and quick sources in Europe 
(mostly Portugal and Spain) and low-cost sources in Asia. This contrasts with most apparel man-
ufacturers, who have moved most of their manufacturing to Asia. About 40 percent of the manu-
facturing capacity is owned by Inditex, with the rest outsourced. Products with highly uncertain 
demand are sourced out of Europe, whereas products that are more predictable are sourced from 
its Asian locations. More than 40 percent of its finished-goods purchases and most of its in-house 
production occur after the sales season starts. This compares with less than 20 percent produc-
tion after the start of a sales season for a typical retailer. This responsiveness, along with the 
postponement of decisions until after trends are known, allow Zara to reduce inventories and 
forecast error. Zara has also invested heavily in information technology to ensure that the latest 
sales data are available to drive replenishment and production decisions.
In 2012, Inditex distributed to stores all over the world from eight distribution centers 
located in Spain. The group claimed an average delivery time of 24 to 36 hours for European 
stores and up to a maximum of 48 hours for stores in America or Asia from the time the order 

--- PAGE 39 ---
18 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain
was received in the distribution center (DC) to the time it was delivered to the stores. Shipments 
from the DCs to stores were made several times a week. This allowed store inventory to closely 
match customer demand.
The following questions raise supply chain issues that are central to Zara’s strategy and 
success:
 1. What advantage does Zara gain against the competition by having a very responsive supply 
chain?
 2. Why has Inditex chosen to have both in-house manufacturing and outsourced manufactur-
ing? Why has Inditex maintained manufacturing capacity in Europe even though manufac-
turing in Asia is much cheaper?
 3. Why does Zara source products with uncertain demand from local manufacturers and 
products with predictable demand from Asian manufacturers?
 4. What advantage does Zara gain from replenishing its stores multiple times a week com-
pared with a less frequent schedule?
 5. Do you think Zara’s responsive replenishment infrastructure is better suited for online 
sales or retail sales?
W.W. Grainger and McMaster-Carr: MRO Suppliers
W.W. Grainger and McMaster-Carr sell maintenance, repair, and operations (MRO) products. 
Both companies have catalogs and web pages through which orders can be placed. W.W. Grainger 
also has several hundred stores throughout the United States. Customers can walk into a store, 
call in an order, or place it via the website. W.W. Grainger orders are either shipped to the cus-
tomer or picked up by the customer at one of its stores. McMaster-Carr, on the other hand, ships 
almost all its orders (although a few customers near its DCs do pick up their own orders). W.W. 
Grainger has nine DCs that both replenish stores and fill customer orders. McMaster has five 
DCs from which all orders are filled. Neither McMaster nor W.W. Grainger manufactures any 
product. They both primarily serve the role of a distributor or retailer. Their success is largely 
linked to their supply chain management ability.
Both firms offer several hundred thousand products to their customers. Grainger stocks 
about 300,000 stock-keeping units (SKUs), whereas McMaster carries about 500,000. Grainger 
also provides many other products that it does not stock directly from its suppliers. Both firms 
face the following strategic and operational issues:
 1. How many DCs should be built, and where should they be located?
 2. How should product stocking be managed at the DCs? Should all DCs carry all products?
 3. What products should be carried in inventory and what products should be left with the 
supplier to be shipped directly in response to a customer order?
 4. What products should W.W. Grainger carry at a store?
 5. How should markets be allocated to DCs in terms of order fulfillment? What should be 
done if an order cannot be completely filled from a DC? Should there be specified backup 
locations? How should they be selected?
Toyota: A Global Auto Manufacturer
Toyota Motor Corporation is Japan’s top auto manufacturer and has experienced significant 
growth in global sales over the past two decades. A key issue facing Toyota is the design of its 
global production and distribution network. Part of Toyota’s global strategy is to open factories 
in every market it serves. Toyota must decide what the production capability of each of the facto-
ries will be, as this has a significant impact on the desired distribution system. At one extreme, 
each plant can be equipped only for local production. At the other extreme, each plant is capable 
of supplying every market. Before 1996, Toyota used specialized local factories for each market. 

--- PAGE 40 ---
 Chapter 1 • Understanding the Supply Chain 19
After the Asian financial crisis in 1996–97, Toyota redesigned its plants so it could also export to 
markets that remain strong when the local market weakens. Toyota calls this strategy “global 
complementation.”
Whether to be global or local is also an issue for Toyota’s parts plants and product design. 
Should parts plants be built for local production or should there be a few parts plants globally 
that supply multiple assembly plants? Toyota has worked hard to increase commonality in parts 
used around the globe. Although this has helped the company lower costs and improve parts 
availability, common parts caused significant difficulty when one of the parts had to be recalled. 
In 2009, Toyota had to recall about 12 million cars using common parts across North America, 
Europe, and Asia, causing significant damage to the brand as well as to the finances.
Any global manufacturer like Toyota must address the following questions regarding the 
configuration and capability of the supply chain:
 1. Where should the plants be located, and what degree of flexibility should be built into 
each? What capacity should each plant have?
 2. Should plants be able to produce for all markets or only for specific contingency markets?
 3. How should markets be allocated to plants and how frequently should this allocation be 
revised?
 4. How should the investment in flexibility be valued?
Amazon: Online Sales
Amazon sells books, music, and many other items over the Internet and is one of the pioneers of 
online consumer sales. Amazon, based in Seattle, started by filling all orders using books pur -
chased from a distributor in response to customer orders. As it grew, the company added ware-
houses, allowing it to react more quickly to customer orders. In 2013, Amazon had about 40 
warehouses in the United States and another 40 in the rest of the world. It uses the U.S. Postal 
Service and other package carriers, such as UPS and FedEx, to send products to customers. Out-
bound shipping-related costs at Amazon in 2012 were over $5 billion.
Following the introduction of the Kindle, Amazon has worked hard to increase sales of 
digital books. The company has also added a significant amount of audio and video content for 
sale in digital form.
Amazon has continued to expand the set of products that it sells online. Besides books 
and music, Amazon has added many product categories such as toys, apparel, electronics, 
jewelry, and shoes. In 2009, one of its largest acquisitions was Zappos, a leader in online 
shoe sales. This acquisition added a great deal of product variety: According to the Amazon 
annual report, this required creating 121,000 product descriptions and uploading more than 
2.2 million images to the website. In 2010, another interesting acquisition by Amazon was 
diapers.com. Unlike Zappos, this acquisition added little variety but considerable shipping 
volumes.
Several questions arise concerning how Amazon is structured and the product categories it 
continues to add:
 1. Why is Amazon building more warehouses as it grows? How many warehouses should it 
have, and where should they be located?
 2. Should Amazon stock every product it sells?
 3. What advantage can bricks-and-mortar players derive from setting up an online channel? 
How should they use the two channels to gain maximum advantage?
 4. What advantages and disadvantages does the online channel enjoy in the sale of shoes and 
diapers relative to a retail store?
 5. For what products does the online channel offer the greater advantage relative to retail 
stores? What characterizes these products?