 
MANAGEMENT
Visit our website at
www.pearson-books.com
 
Visit our website at
www.pearson-books.com
LOGISTICS &
SUPPLY CHAIN
MANAGEMENT
MARTIN CHRISTOPHER
FOURTH EDITION
LOGISTICS & SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT      MARTIN CHRISTOPHER
Effective design and management of supply chain networks can cut costs 
and enhance customer value. The supply chain can be a sustainable source 
of advantage in today’s turbulent global marketplace, where demand is 
difﬁ  cult to predict and supply chains need to be more ﬂ  exible as a result. 
In fact, the real competition today is not between companies, but between 
supply chains. The winning approach to supply chains is an integrated 
perspective that takes account of networks of relationships, sustainability 
and product design, as well as the logistics of procurement, distribution, 
and fulﬁ  lment. Logistics & Supply Chain Management examines the tools, 
core processes and initiatives that ensure businesses can gain and maintain 
competitive advantage.
This updated fourth edition 
of the bestselling Logistics & 
Supply Chain Management is 
the practical guide to all the key 
topics in an integrated approach 
to supply chains, including:
 
•   The link between logistics and 
customer value 
•
  Logistics and the bottom line – 
measuring costs and performance 
•
  Creating a responsive supply chain 
•
  Managing the global pipeline 
•
  Managing supply chain relationships 
•
  Managing risk in the supply chain 
•
  Matching supply and demand 
•
  Creating a sustainable supply chain 
•
  Product design in the supply chain
Martin Christopher is Emeritus Professor 
of Marketing and Logistics at Cranﬁ  eld School 
of Mangement, a leading UK business school. 
He has written numerous books and articles 
and is on the editorial advisory board of several 
professional journals. Until recently he was co-
editor of The International Journal of Logistics 
Management and his latest books have focused 
upon relationship marketing, logistics and supply 
chain management.
He has held appointments as Visiting Professor 
at universities around the world. Professor 
Christopher is a Fellow of The Chartered 
Institute of Marketing, The Chartered Institute 
of Logistics and Transport and The Chartered 
Institute of Purchasing & Supply. In 1987 he 
was awarded the Sir Robert Lawrence medal 
of The Chartered Institute of Logistics and 
Transport for his contribution to the development 
of logistics education in Britain. In 2005 he was 
awarded the Distinguished Service Award of 
the USA Council for Supply Chain Management 
Professionals. In 2007 he was designated 
as Foundation Professor by The Chartered 
Institute of Purchasing & Supply. Martin has also 
worked as a consultant for major international 
companies in North America, Europe, the Far 
East and Australasia.
www.martin-christopher.info      
‘For many years now, Martin Christopher’s book has been my default 
recommendation to anyone seeking to acquire a quick yet comprehensive 
grasp of supply chain issues and management. Whether you are a recent 
entrant to the ﬁ  eld or a seasoned practitioner looking for inspiration, this 
book is for you!’ Bjorn Vang Jensen, Vice President, Global Logistics, Electrolux
‘You must read this book for his assessment of the challenges that lie 
ahead.’ Dr John Gattorna, supply chain ‘thought leader’ and author of Dynamic 
Supply Chains
‘A powerful book for executives and practitioners. It emphasises the 
“end-to-end” view of supply chains, focusing on both cost efﬁ  ciency and 
value creation. The principles and concepts are illustrated with practical 
examples and applications. It is a great contribution.’ Professor Hau Lee, 
Stanford Graduate School of Business, USA
Design: Dan Mogford
The fourth edition has been updated and now contains four new chapters covering:
• MANAGING SUPPLY CHAIN RELATIONSHIPS
• PRODUCT DESIGN IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN
• MATCHING SUPPLY AND DEMAND 
• CREATING A SUSTAINABLE SUPPLY CHAIN
 
Logistics & Supply  
Chain Management
 
In an increasingly competitive world, we believe it's quality of  
thinking that gives you the edge – an idea that opens new  
doors, a technique that solves a problem, or an insight that  
simply makes sense of it all. The more you know, the smarter  
and faster you can go.
That's why we work with the best minds in business and finance  
to bring cutting-edge thinking and best learning practice to a  
global market.
Under a range of leading imprints, including Financial Times 
Prentice Hall, we create world-class print publications and 
electronic products, bringing our readers knowledge, skills and  
understanding, which can be applied whether studying or at work.
To find out more about Pearson Education publications, or tell us 
about the books you'd like to find, you can visit us at  
www.pearsoned.co.uk
Logistics & Supply  
Chain Management
Fourth Edition
 
Logistics & Supply  
Chain Management
Fourth Edition
M A R T I N  C H R I S T O P H E R
[ ]
 
 
PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow CM20 2JE
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Fax: +44 (0)1279 431059
Website: www.pearsoned.co.uk
First published in Great Britain in 1992
Second edition 1998
Third edition 2005
Fourth edition 2011
© Pearson Education Limited 2011
The right of Martin Christopher to be identified as author of this work has been asserted  
by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval  
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of  
the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the  
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.  
This book may not be lent, resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published, without the prior consent  
of the Publishers.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text 
does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the 
use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this book by such owners.
Pearson Education is not responsible for the content of third party internet sites.
ISBN: 978-0-273-73112-2
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Christopher, Martin.
  Logistics and supply chain management : creating value-adding networks / Martin 
Christopher. -- 4th ed.
      p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-273-73112-2 (pbk.)
 1. Business logistics--Cost effectiveness. 2. Delivery of goods--Management. I.
Title.
  HD38.5.C46 2011
  658.5--dc22
                                           2010033709
11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
14 13 12 11 10
Typeset in Swiss Light 9.25 pt/12 pt by 30
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Henry Ling Ltd, Dorchester, Dorset
 
Martin Christopher  is Emeritus Professor of Marketing and Logistics at Cranfield 
School of Management in the United Kingdom. His work in the field of logistics 
and supply chain management has gained international recognition. He has pub-
lished widely and his books have been translated into many languages. Martin 
Christopher co-founded the International Journal of Logistics Management and was 
its joint editor for 18 years. He is a regular contributor to conferences and work-
shops around the world.
 In addition to working with many companies in an advisory capacity he is also a 
Visiting Professor at universities in the UK, Australia, Spain and Sweden.
 Martin Christopher is an Emeritus Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Logistics 
and Transport. He is also a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and 
Supply and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Marketing. He is the recipient of 
the Distinguished Service Award of the USA Council of Supply Chain Management 
Professionals.
About the author
v
 
 
 About the author v
 Preface x
 Publisher's acknowledgements xi
 1 Logistics, the supply chain and competitive strategy  1
 Supply chain management is a wider concept than logistics 2
 Competitive advantage 4
 The supply chain becomes the value chain 9
 The mission of logistics management 11
 The supply chain and competitive performance 13
 The changing competitive environment 15
 2 Logistics and customer value  27
 The marketing and logistics interface 28
 Delivering customer value 29
 What is customer service? 31
 The impact of out-of-stock 33
 Customer service and customer retention 34
 Market-driven supply chains 38
 Defining customer service objectives 42
 Setting customer service priorities 46
 Setting service standards 50
 
 3 Measuring logistics costs and performance  57
 Logistics and the bottom line 58
 Logistics and shareholder value 62
 Logistics cost analysis 66
 The concept of total cost analysis 67
 Principles of logistics costing 70
 Customer profitability analysis 72
 Direct product profitability 78
 Cost drivers and activity-based costing 80
 4 Matching supply and demand  83
 The lead-time gap 83
 Improving the visibility of demand 85
 The supply chain fulcrum 87
 Forecast for capacity, execute against demand 89
 Demand management and planning 89
 Collaborative planning, forecasting and replenishment 94
Contents
vii
 
viii c o n t e n t s
 5 creating the responsive supply chain  99
 Product 'push' versus demand 'pull' 104
 The Japanese philosophy 109
 The foundations of agility 112
 A routemap to responsiveness 116
 6 strategic lead-time management  121
 Time-based competition 121
 Lead-time concepts 125
 Logistics pipeline management 129
 7 the synchronous supply chain  141
 The extended enterprise and the virtual supply chain 142
 The role of information in the virtual supply chain 144
 Laying the foundations for synchronisation 147
 'Quick response' logistics 150
 Production strategies for quick response 153
 Logistics systems dynamics 154
 8 complexity and the supply chain  159
 The sources of supply chain complexity 161
 The cost of complexity 165
 Product design and supply chain complexity 166
 Mastering complexity 167
 9 Managing the global pipeline  171
 The trend towards globalisation in the supply chain 173
 Gaining visibility in the global pipeline 178
 Organising for global logistics 180
 Thinking global, acting local 184
 The future of global sourcing 185
10 Managing risk in the supply chain  189
 Why are supply chains more vulnerable? 190
 Understanding the supply chain risk profile 193
 Managing supply chain risk 198
 Achieving supply chain resilience 206
11 the era of network competition  211
 The new organisational paradigm 212
 Collaboration in the supply chain 214
 Managing the supply chain as a network 217
 Seven major business transformations 218
 The implications for tomorrow's logistics managers 220
viii
 
c o n t e n t s ix
 Supply chain orchestration 222
 From 3PL to 4PL™ 223
12 overcoming the barriers to supply chain integration  227
 Creating the logistics vision 228
 The problems with conventional organisations 228
 Developing the logistics organisation 232
 Logistics as the vehicle for change 236
 Benchmarking 237
13 creating a sustainable supply chain  241
 The triple bottom line 241
 Greenhouse gases and the supply chain 243
 Reducing the transport-intensity of supply chains 245
 Peak oil 247
 Beyond the carbon footprint 248
 Reduce, reuse, recycle 250
 The impact of congestion 252
14 the supply chain of the future  257
 Emerging mega-trends 258
 Shifting centres of gravity 259
 The multi-channel revolution 261
 Seeking structural flexibility 264
 2020 vision 266
 Index 269
ix
 
Preface
When the first edition of this book was published in 1992, supply chain management 
as an idea was still in its infancy and relatively few companies had made it a priority.
 The same was true for logistics management, although its precursor, distribution 
management, was increasingly being recognised as important both in terms of cost 
and for its potential impact on sales.
 In the intervening years from the first to the fourth edition, many things have hap-
pened. Firstly, there is now a much greater understanding of the role that supply 
chain management plays in creating competitive advantage. Whereas previously 
the focus was primarily tactical with a concern for optimising costs, now there is 
much more of a strategic focus with the emphasis on value creation and delivery. 
The second major change is the recognition that supply chain management is not 
just an extension of logistics management, but rather that it is about managing 
relationships across the complex networks that today's supply chains have become. 
A third significant change over that period is that the business environment has 
become a lot more volatile and hence less predictable. This transition from a rela-
tively stable world to one that is much more turbulent requires supply chains to be 
capable of changing rapidly to meet changed circumstances.
 
These changes are reflected in the additional material included in this new edition. 
Thus complexity management and the challenge of making the transition from a 
forecast-driven to a demand-driven business model are given greater emphasis.
 As ever, I have been greatly influenced in my thinking by the ideas and contri-
butions of colleagues. I have had the privilege over the years to work with many 
academics and practitioners around the world who have provided me with inspira-
tion as well as feedback on my ideas on how modern supply chains should be 
designed and managed. Long-standing collaborators include Alan Braithwaite, 
Chairman of LCP Consulting, Professor John Gattorna of Macquarie University, 
Australia, Professor Douglas Lambert of Ohio State University, USA and Professor 
Denis Towill of Cardiff University, UK. 
 More recently I have benefited greatly from sharing ideas with Dr Omera Khan of 
Manchester University, UK, Dr Matthias Holweg of Cambridge University, UK and 
Dr Janet Godsell and Dr Uta Jüttner, both colleagues at Cranfield University. I thank 
them all.
 Finally I want to thank Tracy Stickells who has skilfully managed the production 
of the manuscript for this book – a complex logistics process in itself.
MARTIN CHRISTOPHER
EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF MARKETING & LOGISTICS
CENTRE FOR LOGISTICS AND SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
CRANFIELD UNIVERSITY, UK
x
 
xi
Publisher's Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright material:
Figures
Figure 1.7 from Competitive Advantage, The Free Press (Porter, M.E. 1985), Reprinted 
with the permission of The Free Press, a Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc., 
from COMPETETIVE ADVANTAGE: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance 
by Michael E. Porter. Copyright © 1985, 1998 by Michael E. Porter. All rights 
reserved.; Figure 1.9 from Integrating the Supply Chain, International Journal of 
Physical Distribution and Materials Management, 19 (8) (Stevens, G.C. 1989), 
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management by Scott, 
C. and Westbrook, R. Copyright 1991 by EMERALD GROUP PUBLISHING LIMITED. 
Reproduced with permission of EMERALD GROUP PUBLISHING LIMITED in the 
format Textbook via Copyright Clearance Center. ; Figure 2.2 from 'Stock-outs cause 
walkouts', Harvard Business Review, May (Corsten, D. and Gruen, T. 2004); Figure 
3.10 from Logistics – The Battleground of the 1990s, A.T. Kearney (Hill, G.V.); Figure 
3.11 from Managing the Supply Chain: A Strategic Perspective, Macmillan Press 
(Gattorna, J.L. and Walters, D.W. 1996); Figure 6.13 from 'New strategic tools for 
supply chain management', International Journal of Physical Distribution of Logistics 
Management, 21 (1) (Scott, C. and Westbrook, R. 1991), Emerald; Figure 9.3 from 
Supply Chain Resilience, Report on behalf of the Department of Transport, Cranfield 
School of Management (2003)
Tables
Table on page 74 from 'The Customer Profit Centre', Focus, 2 (2) (Hill, G.V. and 
Harland, D.V. 1983), Institute of Logistics and Distribution Management; Table 10.1 
from Supply Chains in a Vulnerable, Volatile World, A.T. Kearney (2003)
Text
Quote on page 136 from The Scotsman, 14/02/2007; Extract on page 160 from 
The Times, 21/04/2010; Extract on page 186 from Disenchanted companies begin 
moving production back to UK, The Times, 30/12/2009; Article on page 195 from 
Supply Chains in a Vulnerable, Volatile World (A.T. Kearney 2003); Article on page 244 
from 12,000-mile round trip to have seafood shelled, Daily Telegraph, 16/11/2006, 
© Telegraph Media Group Limited 2006; Extract on page 244 from Mastering 
Carbon Management: Balancing Trade-Offs to Optimise Supply Chain Efficiencies, 
IBM Global Services (Butner, K., Geuder, D. and Hittner, J. 2008), Reprint courtesy 
of International Business Machines Corporation, © 2008 International Business 
Machines Corporation; Extract on page 252 from Supply Management, 15 February 
2007, www.supplymanagement.com; Extract on page 254 from 'Intelligent Transport 
Systems', Postnote, January, No. 322 (UK Parliamentary Office of Science and 
 
Technology 2009), Crown Copyright material is reproduced with permission under the 
terms of the Click-Use Licence; Extract on page 260 from 'Global Trends in Energy', 
The McKinsey Quarterly, January 2007 (Bozon, I.J.H., Campbell, W.J. and Lindstrand, 
M.), Excerpt from “Global Trends in Energy”, January 2007, McKinsey Quarterly, www.
mckinseyquarterly.com. Copyright (c) 2010 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved. 
Reprinted by permission. ; Article on page 261 from Web-savvy housewives sabotage 
efforts to save Japan's economy from stagnation, The Times, 02/04/2010
In some instances we have been unable to trace the owners of copyright material, and 
we would appreciate any information that would enable us to do so.
P u b l i s h e r ' s  a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t sxii
 
1
Logistics and supply chain management are not new ideas. From the building of 
the pyramids to the relief of hunger in Africa, the principles underpinning the effec-
tive flow of materials and information to meet the requirements of customers have 
altered little.
 
Throughout the history of mankind wars have been won and lost through logistics 
strengths and capabilities – or the lack of them. It has been argued that the defeat of 
the British in the American War of Independence can largely be attributed to logistics 
failure. The British Army in America depended almost entirely upon Britain for sup-
plies. At the height of the war there were 12,000 troops overseas and for the most 
part they had not only to be equipped, but fed from Britain. For the first six years of 
the war the administration of these vital supplies was totally inadequate, affecting the 
course of operations and the morale of the troops. An organisation capable of sup-
plying the army was not developed until 1781 and by then it was too late.
1
 In the Second World War logistics also played a major role. The Allied Forces’ 
invasion of Europe was a highly skilled exercise in logistics, as was the defeat 
of Rommel in the desert. Rommel himself once said that ‘… before the fighting 
proper, the battle is won or lost by quartermasters’.
Logistics, the supply  
chain and competitive  
strategy
1
M MSupply chain management is a wider concept than 
logistics
M MCompetitive advantage
M MThe supply chain becomes the value chain
M MThe mission of logistics management 
M MThe supply chain and competitive performance 
M MThe changing competitive environment 
 
However, whilst the Generals and Field Marshals from the earliest times have 
understood the critical role of logistics, strangely it is only in the recent past that 
business organisations have come to recognise the vital impact that logistics man-
agement can have in the achievement of competitive advantage. Partly this lack of 
recognition springs from the relatively low level of understanding of the benefits of 
integrated logistics. As early as 1915, Arch Shaw pointed out that:
The relations between the activities of demand creation and physical supply … 
illustrate the existence of the two principles of interdependence and balance. 
Failure to co-ordinate any one of these activities with its group-fellows and also 
with those in the other group, or undue emphasis or outlay put upon any one     
of these activities, is certain to upset the equilibrium of forces which means 
efficient distribution.
    … The physical distribution of the goods is a problem distinct from the 
creation  of demand … Not a few worthy failures in distribution campaigns  
have been due to such a lack of co-ordination between demand creation and 
physical supply …
    Instead of being a subsequent problem, this question of supply must be met 
and answered before the work of distribution begins.
2
It is paradoxical that it has taken almost 100 years for these basic principles of 
logistics management to be widely accepted.
 What is logistics management in the sense that it is understood today?  
There are many ways of defining logistics but the underlying concept might be 
defined as:
Logistics is the process of strategically managing the procurement, move-
ment and storage of materials, parts and finished inventory (and the related 
information flows) through the organisation and its marketing channels in 
such a way that current and future profitability are maximised through the 
cost-effective fulfilment of orders.
This basic definition will be extended and developed as the book progresses, but it 
makes an adequate starting point.
Supply chain management is a wider concept  
than logistics
Logistics is essentially a planning orientation and framework that seeks to create 
a single plan for the flow of products and information through a business. Supply 
chain management builds upon this framework and seeks to achieve linkage and 
co-ordination between the processes of other entities in the pipeline, i.e. suppliers 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T2
It i s only in the recent past that business organisations have come to recognise 
the vital impact that logistics management can have in the achievement of 
competitive advantage.
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 3
and customers, and the organisation itself. Thus, for example, one goal of supply 
chain management might be to reduce or eliminate the buffers of inventory that 
exist between organisations in a chain through the sharing of information on 
demand and current stock levels. 
 It will be apparent that supply chain management involves a significant change 
from the traditional arm’s-length, even adversarial, relationships that so often 
typified buyer/supplier relationships in the past. The focus of supply chain man-
agement is on co-operation and trust and the recognition that, properly managed, 
the ‘whole can be greater than the sum of its parts’.
 The definition of supply chain management adopted in this book is:
The management of upstream and downstream relationships with suppliers 
and customers in order to deliver superior customer value at less cost to the 
supply chain as a whole.
Thus the focus of supply chain management is upon the management of relation-
ships in order to achieve a more profitable outcome for all parties in the chain. This 
brings with it some significant challenges since there may be occasions when the 
narrow self-interest of one party has to be subsumed for the benefit of the chain as 
a whole.
 Whilst the phrase ‘supply chain management’ is now widely used, it could be 
argued that it should really be termed ‘ demand chain management ’ to reflect the 
fact that the chain should be driven by the market, not by suppliers. Equally the 
word ‘chain’ should be replaced by ‘ network ’ since there will normally be multiple 
suppliers and, indeed, suppliers to suppliers as well as multiple customers and 
customers’ customers to be included in the total system.
 Figure 1.1 illustrates this idea of the firm being at the centre of a network of sup-
pliers and customers.
 
Extending this idea it has been suggested that a supply chain could more accu-
rately be defined as:
Figure 1.1 The supply chain network
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T4
A network of connected and interdependent organisations mutually and 
co-operatively working together to control, manage and improve the flow of 
materials and information from suppliers to end users.
Source: J. AITkEn
3
Competitive advantage
A central theme of this book is that effective logistics and supply chain manage-
ment can provide a major source of competitive advantage – in other words a 
position of enduring superiority over competitors in terms of customer preference 
may be achieved through better management of logistics and the supply chain.
 The foundations for success in the marketplace are numerous, but a simple 
model is based around the triangular linkage of the company, its customers and its 
competitors – the ‘Three Cs’. Figure 1.2 illustrates the three-way relationship.
The source of competitive advantage is found firstly in the ability of the organisa-
tion to differentiate itself, in the eyes of the customer, from its competition, and 
secondly by operating at a lower cost and hence at greater profit.
 Seeking a sustainable and defensible competitive advantage has become the 
concern of every manager who is alert to the realities of the marketplace. It is no 
longer acceptable to assume that good products will sell themselves, neither is it 
advisable to imagine that success today will carry forward into tomorrow.
 Let us consider the bases of success in any competitive context. At its most 
elemental, commercial success derives from either a cost advantage or a value 
advantage or, ideally, both. It is as simple as that – the most profitable competitor 
in any industry sector tends to be the lowest-cost producer or the supplier provid-
ing a product with the greatest perceived differentiated values.
Customers
Needs seeking benefits
at acceptable prices
Cost
differentials
Assets and
utilisation
Assets and
utilisation
Company Competitor
Value
Value
Figure 1.2 Competitive advantage and the ‘Three Cs’
Source: Ohmae, k., The Mind of the Strategist, Penguin Books, 1983
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 5
 Put very simply, successful companies either have a cost advantage or they 
have a value advantage, or – even better – a combination of the two. Cost advan-
tage gives a lower cost profile and the value advantage gives the product or 
offering a differential ‘plus’ over competitive offerings.
 Let us briefly examine these two vectors of strategic direction.
1 Cost advantage
In many industries there will typically be one competitor who will be the low-cost 
producer and often that competitor will have the greatest sales volume in the 
sector. There is substantial evidence to suggest that ‘big is beautiful’ when it 
comes to cost advantage. This is partly due to economies of scale, which enable 
fixed costs to be spread over a greater volume, but more particularly to the impact 
of the ‘experience curve’.
 The experience curve is a phenomenon with its roots in the earlier notion of 
the ‘learning curve’. Researchers in the Second World War discovered that it was 
possible to identify and predict improvements in the rate of output of workers as 
they became more skilled in the processes and tasks on which they were working. 
Subsequent work by Boston Consulting Group, extended this concept by demon-
strating that all costs, not just production costs, would decline at a given rate as 
volume increased (see Figure 1.3). In fact, to be precise, the relationship that the 
experience curve describes is between real unit costs and cumulative volume.
Traditionally it has been suggested that the main route to cost reduction was 
through the achievement of greater sales volume and in particular by improving 
market share. However, the blind pursuit of economies of scale through volume 
increases may not always lead to improved profitability – the reason being that 
in today’s world much of the cost of a product lies outside the four walls of the 
business in the wider supply chain. Hence it can be argued that it is increasingly 
through better logistics and supply chain management that efficiency and produc-
tivity can be achieved leading to significantly reduced unit costs. How this can be 
achieved will be one of the main themes of this book.
Cumulative volume
Real costs per unit
Figure 1.3 The experience curve
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T6
2 Value advantage
It has long been an axiom in marketing that ‘customers don’t buy products, they 
buy benefits’. Put another way, the product is purchased not for itself but for the 
promise of what it will ‘deliver’. These benefits may be intangible, i.e. they relate 
not to specific product features but rather to such things as image or service. In 
addition, the delivered offering may be seen to outperform its rivals in some func-
tional aspect.
 Unless the product or service we offer can be distinguished in some way from 
its competitors there is a strong likelihood that the marketplace will view it as a 
‘commodity’ and so the sale will tend to go to the cheapest supplier. Hence the 
importance of seeking to add additional values to our offering to mark it out from 
the competition.
 What are the means by which such value differentiation may be gained? 
Essentially the development of a strategy based upon added values will normally 
require a more segmented approach to the market. When a company scrutinises 
markets closely it frequently finds that there are distinct ‘value segments’. In other 
words, different groups of customers within the total market attach different impor-
tance to different benefits. The importance of such benefit segmentation lies in 
the fact that often there are substantial opportunities for creating differentiated 
appeals for specific segments. Take the car industry as an example. Most volume 
car manufacturers such as Toyota or Ford offer a range of models positioned at 
different price points in the market. However, it is increasingly the case that each 
model is offered in a variety of versions. Thus at one end of the spectrum may be 
the basic version with a small engine and two doors and at the other end, a four-
door, high-performance version. In between are a whole variety of options, each of 
which seeks to satisfy the needs of quite different ‘benefit segments’. Adding value 
through differentiation is a powerful means of achieving a defensible advantage in 
the market.
 Equally powerful as a means of adding value is service. Increasingly it is the 
case that markets are becoming more service-sensitive and this of course poses 
particular challenges for logistics management. There is a trend in many markets 
towards a decline in the strength of the ‘brand’ and a consequent move towards 
‘commodity’ market status. Quite simply this means that it is becoming progres-
sively more difficult to compete purely on the basis of brand or corporate image. 
Additionally, there is increasingly a convergence of technology within product cate-
gories, which means that it is often no longer possible to compete effectively on the 
basis of product differences. Thus the need to seek differentiation through means 
other than technology. Many companies have responded to this by focusing upon 
service as a means of gaining a competitive edge. Service in this context relates to 
Logistics and supply chain management can provide a multitude of ways 
to increase efficiency and productivity and hence contribute significantly to 
reduced unit costs.
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 7
the process of developing relationships with customers through the provision of an 
augmented offer. This augmentation can take many forms including delivery serv-
ice, after-sales services, financial packages, technical support and so forth.
Seeking the high ground
In practice what we find is that the successful companies will often seek to achieve 
a position based upon both a cost advantage and a value advantage. A useful 
way of examining the available options is to present them as a simple matrix. Let 
us consider these options in turn.
For companies who find themselves in the bottom left-hand corner of our matrix 
(Figure 1.4) the world is an uncomfortable place. Their products are indistinguishable 
from their competitors’ offerings and they have no cost advantage. These are typi-
cal commodity market situations and ultimately the only strategy is either to move to 
the right of the matrix, i.e. to cost leadership, or upwards towards service leadership. 
Often the cost leadership route is simply not available. This particularly will be the 
case in a mature market where substantial market share gains are difficult to achieve. 
new technology may sometimes provide a window of opportunity for cost reduction 
but in such situations the same technology is often available to competitors.
 Cost leadership strategies have traditionally been based upon the economies 
of scale gained through sales volume. This is why market share is considered to 
be so important in many industries. However, if volume is to be the basis for cost 
leadership then it is preferable for that volume to be gained early in the market life 
cycle. The ‘experience curve’ concept, briefly described earlier, demonstrates the 
value of early market share gains – the higher your share relative to your competi-
tors the lower your costs should be. This cost advantage can be used strategically 
to assume a position of price leader and, if appropriate, to make it impossible 
for higher-cost competitors to survive. Alternatively, price may be maintained, 
Value advantage
Cost advantage
Low High
Low High
Service
leader
Cost and
service leader
Commodity
market
Cost
leader
Figure 1.4 Logistics and competitive advantage
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T8
enabling above-average profit to be earned, which potentially is available to further 
develop the position of the product in the market.
 However, an increasingly powerful route to achieving a cost advantage comes 
not necessarily through volume and the economies of scale but instead through 
logistics and supply chain management. In many industries, logistics costs rep-
resent such a significant proportion of total costs that it is possible to make major 
cost reductions through fundamentally re-engineering logistics processes. The 
means whereby this can be achieved will be returned to later in this book.
 The other way out of the ‘commodity’ quadrant of the matrix is to seek a strat-
egy of differentiation through service excellence. We have already commented 
on the fact that markets have become more ‘service-sensitive’. Customers in all 
industries are seeking greater responsiveness and reliability from suppliers; they 
are looking for reduced lead times, just-in-time delivery and value-added services 
that enable them to do a better job of serving their customers. In Chapter 2 we 
will examine the specific ways in which superior service strategies, based upon 
enhanced logistics management, can be developed.
One thing is certain: there is no middle ground between cost leadership and service 
excellence. Indeed the challenge to management is to identify appropriate logistics 
and supply chain strategies to take the organisation to the top right-hand corner of 
the matrix. Companies who occupy that position have offers that are distinctive in 
the value they deliver and are also cost competitive. Clearly it is a position of some 
strength, occupying ‘high ground’ that is extremely difficult for competitors to attack. 
Figure 1.5 clearly presents the challenge: it is to seek out strategies that will take the 
business away from the ‘commodity’ end of the market towards a securer position of 
strength based upon differentiation and cost advantage.
 Logistics management, it can be argued, has the potential to assist the or gani-
sation in the achievement of both a cost advantage and a value advantage. As Figure 
1.6 suggests, in the first instance there are a number of important ways in which 
Relative differentiation
Relative delivered costs
High Low
Low High
Figure 1.5 The challenge to logistics and supply chain management
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 9
productivity can be enhanced through logistics and supply chain management. Whilst 
these possibilities for leverage will be discussed in detail later in the book, suffice it to 
say that the opportunities for better capacity utilisation, inventory reduction and closer 
integration with suppliers at a planning level are considerable. Equally the prospects 
for gaining a value advantage in the marketplace through superior customer service 
should not be underestimated. It will be argued later that the way we service the cus-
tomer has become a vital means of differentiation.
To summarise, those organisations that will be the leaders in the markets of the 
future will be those that have sought and achieved the twin peaks of excellence: 
they have gained both cost leadership and service leadership.
 The underlying philosophy behind the logistics and supply chain concept is that 
of planning and co-ordinating the materials flow from source to user as an inte-
grated system rather than, as was so often the case in the past, managing the 
goods flow as a series of independent activities. Thus under this approach the 
goal is to link the marketplace, the distribution network, the manufacturing proc-
ess and the procurement activity in such a way that customers are serviced at 
higher levels and yet at lower cost. In other words the goal is to achieve competi-
tive advantage through both cost reduction and service enhancement.
The supply chain becomes the value chain
Of the many changes that have taken place in management thinking over the 
last 30 years or so perhaps the most significant has been the emphasis placed 
upon the search for strategies that will provide superior value in the eyes of the 
Value
advantage
Logistics leverage
opportunities:
•  Tailored services
•  Reliability
•  Responsiveness
Cost advantage
Logistics leverage opportunities:
The goal:
superior
customer
value at
less cost
•  Capacity utilisation
•  Asset turn
•  Synchronous supply
Figure 1.6 Gaining competitive advantage
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T10
customer. To a large extent the credit for this must go to Michael Porter, the 
Harvard Business School professor, who through his research and writing 4  has 
alerted managers and strategists to the central importance of competitive relativi-
ties in achieving success in the marketplace.
 One concept in particular that Michael Porter has brought to a wider audience is 
the ‘value chain’:
competitive advantage cannot be understood by looking at a firm as a 
whole. It stems from the many discrete activities a firm performs in designing, 
producing, marketing, delivering, and supporting its product. each of these 
activities can contribute to a firm’s relative cost position and create a basis 
for differentiation … The value chain disaggregates a firm into its strategically 
relevant activities in order to understand the behaviour of costs and the existing 
and potential sources of differentiation. A firm gains competitive advantage by 
performing these strategically important activities more cheaply or better than its 
competitors.
5
Value chain activities (shown in Figure 1.7) can be categorised into two types – 
primary activities (inbound logistics, operations, outbound logistics, marketing 
and sales, and service) and support activities (infrastructure, human resource 
management, technology development and procurement). These activities 
are integrating functions that cut across the traditional functions of the firm. 
Competitive advantage is derived from the way in which firms organise and per-
form these activities within the value chain. To gain competitive advantage over 
its rivals, a firm must deliver value to its customers by performing these activities 
more efficiently than its competitors or by performing the activities in a unique way 
that creates greater differentiation.
Firm infrastructure
Human resource management
Technology development
Procurement
Support
activities
Outbound
logistics
OperationsInbound
logistics
Marketing
and sales
Service
Primary activities
M
argin
Figure 1.7 The value chain
Source: Porter, M.E., competitive Advantage, The Free Press, 1985
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 11
The implication of Michael Porter’s thesis is that organisations should look at each 
activity in their value chain and assess whether they have a real competitive advan-
tage in the activity. If they do not, the argument goes, then perhaps they should 
consider outsourcing that activity to a partner who can provide that cost or value 
advantage. This logic is now widely accepted and has led to the dramatic upsurge 
in outsourcing activity that can be witnessed in almost every industry.
 Whilst there is often a strong economic logic underpinning the decision to 
outsource activities that may previously have been performed in-house, such 
decisions may add to the complexity of the supply chain. Because there are by 
definition more interfaces to be managed as a result of outsourcing, the need for a 
much higher level of relationship management increases.
 The effect of outsourcing is to extend the value chain beyond the boundaries 
of the business. In other words, the supply chain becomes the value chain. Value 
(and cost) is not just created by the focal firm in a network, but by all the entities 
that connect to each other. This ‘extended enterprise’, as some have termed it, 
becomes the vehicle through which competitive advantage is gained – or lost.
The mission of logistics management
It will be apparent from the previous comments that the mission of logistics 
management is to plan and co-ordinate all those activities necessary to achieve 
desired levels of delivered service and quality at lowest possible cost. Logistics 
must therefore be seen as the link between the marketplace and the supply base. 
The scope of logistics spans the organisation, from the management of raw mate-
rials through to the delivery of the final product. Figure 1.8 illustrates this total 
systems concept.
 
The scope of logistics spans the organisation, from the management of raw 
materials through to the delivery of the final product.
Suppliers
Materials flow
Procurement Operations Distribution Customers
Requirements information flow
Figure 1.8 Logistics management process
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T12
Logistics management, from this total systems viewpoint, is the means whereby 
the needs of customers are satisfied through the co-ordination of the materials 
and information flows that extend from the marketplace, through the firm and its 
operations and beyond that to suppliers. To achieve this company-wide integration 
clearly requires a quite different orientation than that typically encountered in the 
conventional organisation.
 For example, for many years marketing and manufacturing have been seen as 
largely separate activities within the organisation. At best they have coexisted, at 
worst there has been open warfare. Manufacturing priorities and objectives have 
typically been focused on operating efficiency, achieved through long production 
runs, minimised set-ups and change-overs and product standardisation. On the 
other hand, marketing has sought to achieve competitive advantage through vari-
ety, high service levels and frequent product changes.
 In today’s more turbulent environment there is no longer any possibility of 
manufacturing and marketing acting independently of each other. The internecine 
disputes between the ‘barons’ of production and marketing are clearly counter-
productive to the achievement of overall corporate goals.
 It is no coincidence that in recent years both marketing and manufacturing 
have become the focus of renewed attention. Marketing as a concept and a phi-
losophy of customer orientation now enjoys a wider acceptance than ever. It is 
now generally accepted that the need to understand and meet customer require-
ments is a prerequisite for survival. At the same time, in the search for improved 
cost competitiveness, manufacturing management has been the subject of a 
massive revolution. The last few decades have seen the introduction of flexible 
manufacturing systems (FMS), of new approaches to inventory based on materials 
requirements planning (MRP) and just-in-time (JIT) methods and, perhaps most 
important of all, a sustained emphasis on total quality management (TQM).
 Equally there has been a growing recognition of the critical role that procure-
ment plays in creating and sustaining competitive advantage as part of an 
integrated logistics process. Leading-edge organisations now routinely include 
supply-side issues in the development of their strategic plans. not only is the 
cost of purchased materials and supplies a significant part of total costs in most 
organisations, but there is a major opportunity for leveraging the capabilities and 
competencies of suppliers through closer integration of the buyers’ and suppliers’ 
logistics processes.
 In this scheme of things, logistics is therefore essentially an integrative concept 
that seeks to develop a system-wide view of the firm. It is fundamentally a planning 
concept that seeks to create a framework through which the needs of the market-
place can be translated into a manufacturing strategy and plan, which in turn links 
into a strategy and plan for procurement. Ideally there should be a ‘one-plan’ men-
tality within the business which seeks to replace the conventional stand-alone and 
separate plans of marketing, distribution, production and procurement. This, quite 
simply, is the mission of logistics management.
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 13
The supply chain and competitive performance
Traditionally most organisations have viewed themselves as entities that exist inde-
pendently from others and indeed need to compete with them in order to survive. 
However, such a philosophy can be self-defeating if it leads to an unwillingness to 
co-operate in order to compete. Behind this seemingly paradoxical concept is the 
idea of supply chain integration.
 The supply chain is the network of organisations that are involved, through 
upstream and downstream linkages, in the different processes and activities that 
produce value in the form of products and services in the hands of the ultimate 
consumer. Thus, for example, a shirt manufacturer is a part of a supply chain that 
extends upstream through the weavers of fabrics to the manufacturers of fibres, 
and downstream through distributors and retailers to the final consumer. Each of 
these organisations in the chain are dependent upon each other by definition and 
yet, paradoxically, by tradition do not closely co-operate with each other.
 Supply chain management is not the same as ‘vertical integration’. Vertical 
integration normally implies ownership of upstream suppliers and downstream 
customers. This was once thought to be a desirable strategy but increasingly 
organisations are now focusing on their ‘core business’ – in other words the things 
they do really well and where they have a differential advantage. Everything else is 
‘outsourced’ – in other words it is procured outside the firm. So, for example, com-
panies that perhaps once made their own components now only assemble the 
finished product, e.g. automobile manufacturers. Other companies may also sub-
contract the manufacturing as well, e.g. nike in footwear and sportswear. These 
companies have sometimes been termed ‘virtual’ or ‘network’ organisations.
 Clearly this trend has many implications for supply chain management, not the 
least being the challenge of integrating and co-ordinating the flow of materials 
from a multitude of suppliers, often offshore, and similarly managing the distribu-
tion of the finished product by way of multiple intermediaries.
GANT: creating value across a virtual network
A good example of a virtual organisation is the Swedish clothing brand GAnT. At 
the centre of the network is Pyramid Sportswear AB, which directly employs fewer 
than ten people. Pyramid contracts with designers, identifies trends, uses contract 
manufacturers, develops the retailer network and creates the brand image through 
marketing communications. Through its databases, Pyramid closely monitors sales, 
inventories and trends. Its network of closely co-ordinated partners means it can 
react quickly to changes in the market. The network itself changes as requirements 
change, and it will use different designers, freelance photographers, catalogue 
producers, contract manufacturers and so on as appropriate.
Source: CHRISTOPHER, M., PAYnE, A. AnD BALLAnTYnE, D., reLATIoNSHIP 
MArKeTING: creATING STAKeHoLDer VALue, BUTTERWORTH HEInnEMAnn, 2002
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T14
In the past it was often the case that relationships with suppliers and downstream 
customers (such as distributors or retailers) were adversarial rather than co-
operative. It is still the case today that some companies will seek to achieve cost 
reductions or profit improvement at the expense of their supply chain partners. 
Companies such as these do not realise that simply transferring costs upstream or 
downstream does not make them any more competitive. The reason for this is that 
ultimately all costs will make their way to the final marketplace to be reflected in the 
price paid by the end user. The leading-edge companies recognise the fallacy of 
this conventional approach and instead seek to make the supply chain as a whole 
Material
flow
Customer
service
Stage one: baseline
Purchasing Material
control Production Sales Distribution
Material
flow
Customer
service
Stage two: functional integration
Materials
management
Manufacturing
management Distribution
Material
flow
Customer
service
Stage three: internal integration
Manufacturing
management Distribution
Material
flow
Customer
service
Stage four: external integration
Suppliers Internal supply
chain Customers
Materials
management
Figure 1.9 Achieving an integrated supply chain
Source: Stevens, G.C., ‘Integrating the Supply Chain’, International Journal of Physical Distribution and 
Materials Management, Vol. 19, no. 8, 1989
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 15
more competitive through the value it adds and the costs that it reduces overall. 
They have realised that the real competition is not company against company but 
rather supply chain against supply chain.
 It must be recognised that the concept of supply chain management, whilst rel-
atively new, is in fact no more than an extension of the logic of logistics. Logistics 
management is primarily concerned with optimising flows within the organisation, 
whilst supply chain management recognises that internal integration by itself is not 
sufficient. Figure 1.9 suggests that there is in effect an evolution of integration from 
the stage 1 position of complete functional independence where each business 
function such as production or purchasing does its own thing in complete isolation 
from the other business functions. An example would be where production seeks 
to optimise its unit costs of manufacture by long production runs without regard for 
the build-up of finished goods inventory and heedless of the impact it will have on 
the need for warehousing space and the impact on working capital.
 Stage 2 companies have recognised the need for at least a limited degree of 
integration between adjacent functions, e.g. distribution and inventory manage-
ment or purchasing and materials control. The natural next step to stage 3 requires 
the establishment and implementation of an ‘end-to-end’ planning framework that 
will be fully described later in this book.
 Stage 4 represents true supply chain integration in that the concept of linkage 
and co-ordination that is achieved in stage 3 is now extended upstream to suppli-
ers and downstream to customers. There is thus a crucial and important distinction 
to be made between logistics and supply chain management.
The changing competitive environment
As the competitive context of business continues to change, bringing with it new 
complexities and concerns for management generally, it also has to be recognised 
that the impact on logistics and supply chain management of these changes can 
be considerable. Indeed, of the many strategic issues that confront the business 
organisation today, perhaps the most challenging are in the area of logistics and 
supply chain management.
 Much of this book will be devoted to addressing these challenges in detail but 
it is useful at this stage to highlight what are perhaps the most pressing currently. 
These are:
M MThe new rules of competition
M MGlobalisation of industry
M MDownward pressure on price
M MCustomers taking control
The new rules of competition
We are now entering the era of ‘supply chain competition’. The fundamental dif-
ference from the previous model of competition is that an organisation can no 
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T16
longer act as an isolated and independent entity in competition with other similarly 
‘stand-alone’ organisations. Instead, the need to create value delivery systems that 
are more responsive to fast-changing markets and are much more consistent and 
reliable in the delivery of that value requires that the supply chain as a whole be 
focused on the achievement of these goals.
 In the past the ground rules for marketing success were obvious: strong brands 
backed up by large advertising budgets and aggressive selling. This formula now 
appears to have lost its power. Instead, the argument is heard, companies must 
recognise that increasingly it is through their capabilities  and competencies  that 
they compete.
6
 Essentially, this means that organisations create superior value for custom-
ers and consumers by managing their core processes  better than competitors 
manage theirs. These core processes encompass such activities as new product 
development, supplier development, order fulfilment and customer management. 
By performing these fundamental activities in a more cost-effective way than com-
petitors, it is argued, organisations will gain the advantage in the marketplace. This 
principle is powerfully expressed in the words of Jorma Ollila, the past Chairman 
and CEO of nokia:
our experienced and unique way of operating is what we see as increasingly 
putting us ahead of the competition. As we move forward in this complex 
industry, winning will be less about what we do and more about the way we do it.
For example, one capability that is now regarded by many companies as funda-
mental to success in the marketplace is supply chain agility. As product life cycles 
shorten, as customers adopt just-in-time practices and as sellers’ markets become 
buyers’ markets then the ability of the organisation to respond rapidly and flexibly 
to demand can provide a powerful competitive edge. This is a theme to which we 
will return in Chapter 5.
 A major contributing factor influencing the changed competitive environment 
has been the trend towards ‘commoditisation’ in many markets. A commodity 
market is characterised by perceived product equality in the eyes of customers 
resulting in a high preparedness to substitute one make of product for another. 
Research increasingly suggests that consumers are less loyal to specific brands 
but instead will have a portfolio of brands within a category from which they make 
their choice. In situations such as this actual product availability becomes a major 
determinant of demand. There is evidence that more and more decisions are 
being taken at the point of purchase and if there is a gap on the shelf where Brand 
X should be, but Brand Y is there instead, then there is a strong probability that 
Brand Y will win the sale.
 It is not only in consumer markets that the importance of logistics process 
excellence is apparent. In business-to-business and industrial markets it seems 
that product or technical features are of less importance in winning orders than 
issues such as delivery lead times and flexibility. This is not to suggest that product 
or technical features are unimportant – rather it is that they are taken as a ‘given’ 
by the customer. Quite simply, in today’s marketplace the order-winning criteria 
are more likely to be service-based than product-based.
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 17
A parallel development in many markets is the trend towards a concentration of 
demand. In other words customers – as against consumers – are tending to grow in 
size whilst becoming fewer in number. The retail grocery industry is a good example 
in that in most northern European countries a handful of large retailers account for 
over 50 per cent of all sales in any one country. This tendency to the concentration 
of buying power is being accelerated as a result of global mergers and acquisitions. 
The impact of these trends is that these more powerful customers are becoming 
more demanding in terms of their service requirements from suppliers
.
 At the same time as the power in the distribution channel continues to shift 
from supplier to buyer, there is also a trend for customers to reduce their supplier 
base. In other words they want to do business with fewer suppliers and often on 
a longer-term basis. The successful companies in the coming years will be those 
that recognise these trends and seek to establish strategies based upon establish-
ing closer relationships with key accounts. Such strategies will focus upon seeking 
innovative ways to create more value for these customers.
 Building competitive platforms that are grounded in this idea of value-based 
growth will require a much greater focus on managing the core processes that 
we referred to earlier. Whereas the competitive model of the past relied heavily on 
product innovation this will have to be increasingly supplemented by process inno-
vation. The basis for competing in this new era will be:
Competitive advantage = Product excellence × Process excellence
Figure 1.10 suggests that traditionally for many companies the investment has 
mainly been on product excellence and less on process excellence. This is not to 
suggest that product innovation should be given less emphasis – far from it – but 
rather that more emphasis needs to be placed on developing and managing proc-
esses that deliver greater value for key customers.
In today’s marketplace the order-winning criteria are more likely to be service-
based than product-based.
Product excellence (%)
Process excellence (%) 100
100
Revised
emphasis
Current
emphasis
Figure 1.10 Investing in process excellence yields greater benefits
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T18
We have already commented that product life cycles are getting shorter. What we 
have witnessed in many markets is the effect of changes in technology and con-
sumer demand combining to produce more volatile markets where a product can be 
obsolete almost as soon as it reaches the market. There are many current examples 
of shortening life cycles but perhaps the personal computer symbolises them all. In 
this particular case we have seen rapid developments in technology that have first 
created markets where none existed before and then almost as quickly have ren-
dered themselves obsolete as the next generation of product is announced.
 Such shortening of life cycles creates substantial problems for logistics and 
supply chain management. In particular, shorter life cycles demand shorter lead 
times – indeed our definition of lead time may well need to change. Lead times 
are traditionally defined as the elapsed period from receipt of customer order to 
delivery. However, in today’s environment there is a wider perspective that needs 
to be taken. The real lead time is the time taken from the drawing board, through 
procurement, manufacture and assembly to the end market. This is the concept of 
strategic lead time and the management of this time span is the key to success in 
managing logistics operations.
 
There are already situations arising where the life cycle is shorter than the strate-
gic lead time. In other words the life of a product on the market is less than the time 
it takes to design, procure, manufacture and distribute that same product! The impli-
cations of this are considerable both for planning and operations. In a global context 
the problem is exacerbated by the longer transportation times involved.
 Ultimately, therefore, the means of achieving success in such markets is to 
accelerate movement through the supply chain and to make the entire logistics 
system far more flexible and thus responsive to these fast-changing markets.
Globalisation of industry
A further strategic issue that provides a challenge for logistics management is the 
continued trend towards globalisation.
 A global company is more than a multinational company. In the global busi-
ness materials and components are sourced worldwide and products may be 
manufactured offshore and sold in many different countries, perhaps with local 
customisation.
 Such is the trend towards globalisation that it is probably safe to forecast that 
before long most markets will be dominated by global companies. The only role 
left for national companies will be to cater for specific and unique local demands, 
for example in the food industry.
 For global companies like Hewlett Packard, Philips and Caterpillar, the man-
agement of the logistics process has become an issue of central concern. The 
difference between profit and loss for an individual product can hinge upon the 
extent to which the global pipeline can be optimised, because the costs involved 
are so great. The global company seeks to achieve competitive advantage by 
identifying world markets for its products and then to develop a manufacturing and 
logistics strategy to support its marketing strategy. So a company like Caterpillar, 
for example, has dispersed assembly operations to key overseas markets and 
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 19
uses global logistics channels to supply parts to offshore assembly plants and 
after-markets. Where appropriate, Caterpillar will use third-party companies to 
manage distribution and even final finishing. So, for example, in the US a third-
party company in addition to providing parts inspection and warehousing attaches 
options to fork lift trucks. Wheels, counterweights, forks and masts are installed as 
specified by Caterpillar. Thus local market needs can be catered for from a stand-
ardised production process.
 Globalisation also tends to lengthen supply chains as companies increasingly 
move production offshore or source from more distant locations. The impetus 
for this trend, which in recent years has accelerated dramatically, is the search 
for lower labour costs. However, one implication of these decisions is that ‘end-
to-end’ pipeline times may increase significantly. In time-sensitive markets, longer 
lead times can be fatal.
 ‘Time-based competition’ is an idea that will be returned to many times in later 
chapters. Time compression has become a critical management issue. Product life 
cycles are shorter than ever, customers and distributors require just-in-time deliver-
ies and end users are ever more willing to accept a substitute product if their first 
choice is not instantly available.
 
The globalisation of industry, and hence supply chains, is inevitable. However, 
to enable the potential benefits of global networks to be fully realised, a wider 
supply chain perspective must be adopted. It can be argued that for the global 
corporation competitive advantage will increasingly derive from excellence in 
managing the complex web of relationships and flows that characterise their 
supply chains.
Downward pressure on price
Whilst the trend might not be universal there can be no doubting that most markets 
are more price competitive today than they were a decade ago. Prices in the high 
streets and the shopping malls continue to fall in many countries.
 Whilst some of this price deflation can be explained as the result of normal 
cost reduction through learning and experience effects, the rapid fall in the price 
of many consumer goods has other causes. Figure 1.11 shows the comparative 
rate at which VCR and DVD player prices fell in the Uk market. The striking feature 
is that whilst it took 20 years for a VCR to fall in price from £400 to just over £40, it 
took only five years for a DVD player to fall by the same amount, and at the time of 
writing a DVD player can be bought in the Uk for £20! The same phenomenon is 
apparent in markets as diverse as clothing, home furnishings and air travel.
 A fundamental change in the global competitive landscape is driving prices to 
levels that in real terms are as low as they have ever been. A number of causal fac-
tors have contributed to this new market environment.
 Firstly, there are new global competitors who have entered the marketplace 
supported by low-cost manufacturing bases. The dramatic rise of China as a major 
producer of quality consumer products is evidence of this. Secondly, the removal 
of barriers to trade and the deregulation of many markets has accelerated this 
trend, enabling new players to rapidly gain ground. One result of this has been 
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T20
overcapacity in many industries. Overcapacity implies an excess of supply against 
demand and hence leads to further downward pressure on price.
 A further cause of price deflation, it has been suggested, is the Internet, which 
makes price comparison so much easier. The Internet has also enabled auctions 
and exchanges to be established at industry-wide levels, which have also tended 
to drive down prices.
 In addition, there is evidence that customers and consumers are more value 
conscious than has hitherto been the case. Brands and suppliers that could once 
command a price premium because of their perceived superiority can no longer 
do so as the market recognises that equally attractive offers are available at sig-
nificantly lower prices. The success of many retailers’ own-label products or the 
inroads made by low-cost airlines proves this point.
 Against the backdrop of a continued downward pressure on price, it is self-
evident that, in order to maintain profitability, companies must find a way to bring 
down costs to match the fall in price.
 The challenge to the business is to find new opportunities for cost reduction 
when, in all likelihood, the company has been through many previous cost-reduction  
programmes. It can be argued that the last remaining opportunity of any signif-
icance for major cost reduction lies in the wider supply chain rather than in the 
firm’s own internal operations.
 This idea is not new. Back in 1929 Ralph Borsodi expressed it in the following 
words:
In 50 years between 1870 and 1920 the cost of distributing necessities and 
luxuries has nearly trebled, while production costs have gone down by one-fifth 
… What we are saving in production we are losing in distribution.
7
The situation that Borsodi describes can still be witnessed in many industries 
today. For example, companies which thought they could achieve a leaner oper-
ation by moving to just-in-time (JIT) practices often only shifted costs elsewhere 
1984
50
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Year
Price (£)
VCR
1984 £400
2004 £45
DVD
1999 £400
2004 £40
VCR DVD
Figure 1.11 Price deflation in consumer electronics (UK high street prices)
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 21
in the supply chain by forcing suppliers or customers to carry that inventory. 
The car industry, which to many is the home of lean thinking and JIT practices, 
has certainly exhibited some of those characteristics. One analysis of the west-
ern European automobile industry
8  showed that whilst car assembly operations 
were indeed very lean with minimal inventory, the same was not true upstream 
and downstream of those operations. Figure 1.12 shows the profile of inventory 
through the supply chain from the tier 1 suppliers down to the car dealerships.
In this particular case the paradox is that most inventory is being held when it is at 
its most expensive, i.e. as a finished product. The true cost of this inventory to the 
industry is considerable. Whilst inventory costs will vary by industry and by com-
pany, it will be suggested in Chapter 3 that the true cost of carrying inventory is 
rarely less than 25 per cent per year of its value. In the conditions in which the 
automobile industry currently finds itself, this alone is enough to make the differ-
ence between profit and loss.
 This example illustrates the frequently encountered failure to take a wider view 
of cost. For many companies their definition of cost is limited only to those costs 
that are contained within the four walls of their business entity. However, as has 
been suggested earlier, since today’s competition takes place not between com-
panies but between supply chains the proper view of costs has to be ‘end-to-end’ 
since all costs will ultimately be reflected in the price of the finished product in the 
final marketplace.
Days of inventory
120
Customer
100
80
60
40
20
0
Marketplace
Outbound transit
Loading and despatch
Vehicle production WIP
On-site part (VM)
Inbound transit
Finished components
Assembly WIP
Pre-assembly WIP
In-house built parts
Bought-out parts
Raw materials
Inbound
logistics
Vehicle
manufacturers
Outbound
logistics
First tier
supplier
Maximum Average Minimum
Distribution
and retail
Figure 1.12 Inventory profile of the automotive supply chain
Source: Holweg, M. and Pil, F.K., The Second Century, MIT Press, 2004
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T22
 The need to take a supply chain view of cost is further underscored by the 
major trend that is observable across industries worldwide towards outsourcing. 
For many companies today, most of their costs lie outside their legal boundaries; 
activities that used to be performed in-house are now outsourced to specialist 
service providers. The amazing growth of contract manufacturing in electronics 
bears witness to this trend. If the majority of an organisation’s costs lie outside the 
business then it follows that the biggest opportunities for improvement in their cost 
position will also be found in that wider supply chain.
The customers take control
So much has been written and talked about service, quality and excellence that 
there is no escaping the fact that the customer in today’s marketplace is more 
demanding, not just of product quality, but also of service.
 As more and more markets become in effect ‘commodity’ markets, where the 
customer perceives little technical difference between competing offers, the need 
is for the creation of differential advantage through added value. Increasingly a 
prime source of this added value is through customer service.
Customer service may be defined as the consistent provision of time and place 
utility. In other words, products don’t have value until they are in the hands of the 
customer at the time and place required. There are clearly many facets of customer 
service, ranging from on-time delivery through to after-sales support. Essentially the 
role of customer service should be to enhance ‘value-in-use’, meaning that the prod-
uct becomes worth more in the eyes of the customer because service has added 
value to the core product. In this way significant differentiation of the total offer (that 
is the core product plus the service package) can be achieved.
 Those companies that have achieved recognition for service excellence, 
and thus have been able to establish a differential advantage over their com-
petition, are typically those companies where logistics management is a high 
priority. Companies like Xerox, Zara and Dell are typical of such organisations. The 
achievement of competitive advantage through service comes not from slogans or 
expensive so-called customer care programmes, but rather from a combination of 
a carefully thought-out strategy for service, the development of appropriate deliv-
ery systems and commitment from people, from the chief executive down.
 The attainment of service excellence in this broad sense can only be achieved 
through a closely integrated logistics strategy. In reality, the ability to become a 
market leader depends as much upon the effectiveness of one’s operating sys-
tems as it does upon the presentation of the product, the creation of images 
and the influencing of consumer perceptions. In other words, the success of 
McDonald’s, WalMart or any of the other frequently cited paragons of service 
The customer in today’s marketplace is more demanding, not just of product 
quality, but also of service.
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 23
excellence is due not to their choice of advertising agency, but rather to their rec-
ognition that managing the logistics of service delivery on a consistent basis is the 
crucial source of differential advantage.
Managing the ‘4Rs’
As we move rapidly into the era of supply chain competition a number of principles 
emerge to guide the supply chain manager. These can be conveniently summa-
rised as the ‘4Rs’ of responsiveness, reliability, resilience and relationships.
1 Responsiveness
In today’s just-in-time world the ability to respond to customers’ requirements in 
ever-shorter time-frames has become critical. Not only do customers want shorter 
lead times, they are also looking for flexibility and increasingly customised solutions. 
In other words, the supplier has to be able to meet the precise needs of customers 
in less time than ever before. The key word in this changed environment is agility . 
Agility implies the ability to move quickly and to meet customer demand sooner. In a 
fast-changing marketplace agility is actually more important than long-term planning 
in its traditional form. Because future demand patterns are uncertain, by definition 
this makes planning more difficult and, in a sense, hazardous.
 In the future, organisations must be much more demand-driven  than forecast-
driven . The means of making this transition will be through the achievement of 
agility, not just within the company but across the supply chain. Responsiveness 
also implies that the organisation is close to the customer, hearing the voice of the 
market and quick to interpret the demand signals it receives.
2 Reliability
One of the main reasons why any company carries safety stock is because of 
uncertainty. It may be uncertainty about future demand or uncertainty about a 
supplier’s ability to meet a delivery promise, or about the quality of materials or 
components. Significant improvements in reliability can only be achieved through 
re-engineering the processes that impact performance. Manufacturing managers 
long ago discovered that the best way to improve product quality was not by qual-
ity control through inspection but rather to focus on process control. The same is 
true for logistics reliability.
 One of the keys to improving supply chain reliability is through reducing proc-
ess variability. In recent years there has been a considerable increase in the use of 
so-called ‘six sigma’ methodologies. The concept of six sigma will be discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 10 but in essence these tools are designed to enable 
variability in a process to be reduced and controlled. Thus, for example, if there is 
variability in order processing lead times then the causes of that variability can be 
identified and where necessary the process can be changed and brought under 
control through the use of six sigma tools and procedures.
 
L O G I S T I C S  &  S U P P L Y  C H A I N  M A N A G E M E N T24
3 Resilience
Today’s marketplace is characterised by higher levels of turbulence and volatil-
ity. The wider business, economic and political environments are increasingly 
subjected to unexpected shocks and discontinuities. As a result, supply chains 
are vulnerable to disruption and, in consequence, the risk to business continuity  
is increased.
 Whereas in the past the prime objective in supply chain design was probably 
cost minimisation or possibly service optimisation, the emphasis today has to be 
upon resilience. Resilience refers to the ability of the supply chain to cope with 
unexpected disturbances. There is evidence that the tendencies of many compa-
nies to seek out low-cost solutions because of pressure on margins may have led 
to leaner, but more vulnerable, supply chains.
 Resilient supply chains may not be the lowest-cost supply chains but they 
are more capable of coping with the uncertain business environment. Resilient 
supply chains have a number of characteristics, of which the most important is 
a business-wide recognition of where the supply chain is at its most vulnerable. 
Managing the critical nodes and links of a supply chain, to be discussed further in 
Chapter 10, becomes a key priority. Sometimes these ‘critical paths’ may be where 
there is dependence on a single supplier, or a supplier with long replenishment 
lead times, or a bottleneck in a process.
 Other characteristics of resilient supply chains are their recognition of the impor-
tance of strategic inventory and the selective use of spare capacity to cope with 
‘surge’ effects.
4 Relationships
The trend towards customers seeking to reduce their supplier base has already 
been commented upon. In many industries the practice of ‘partnership sourcing’ 
is widespread. It is usually suggested that the benefits of such practices include 
improved quality, innovation sharing, reduced costs and integrated scheduling 
of production and deliveries. Underlying all of this is the idea that buyer/supplier 
relationships should be based upon partnership. Increasingly companies are discov-
ering the advantages that can be gained by seeking mutually beneficial, long-term 
relationships with suppliers. From the suppliers’ point of view, such partnerships 
can prove formidable barriers to entry for competitors. The more that processes are 
linked between the supplier and the customer the more the mutual dependencies 
increase and hence the more difficult it is for competitors to break in.
 Supply chain management by definition is about the management of relation-
ships across complex networks of companies that, whilst legally independent, are 
in reality interdependent. Successful supply chains will be those that are governed 
by a constant search for win-win solutions based upon mutuality and trust. This is 
not a model of relationships that has typically prevailed in the past. It is one that 
will have to prevail in the future as supply chain competition becomes the norm.
 These four themes of responsiveness, reliability, resilience and relationships 
provide the basis for successful logistics and supply chain management. They are 
themes that will be explored in greater detail later in this book.
 
LO G I S T I C S ,  T H E  S U P P LY  C H A I N  A N D  C O M P E T I T I V E  S T R AT E GY 25
References
1. Bowler, R.A., Logistics and the Failure of the British Army in America 1775–1783, 
Princeton University Press, 1975.
2. Shaw, A.W., Some Problems in Market Distribution , Harvard University Press, 1915.
3. Aitken, J., Supply Chain Integration within the Context of a Supplier Association, 
Cranfield University, Ph.D. thesis, 1998.
4. Porter, M.E.,Competitive Strategy, The Free Press, 1980. 
5. Porter, M.T.,Competitive Advantage, The Free Press, 1985, p.33.
6. Stalk, G., Evans, P. and Shulman, L.E., ‘Competing on capabilities: the new 
rule of corporate strategy’, Harvard Business Review, March–April 1992; 
Prahalad, C. and Hamel, G., ‘The core competence of the corporation’, Harvard 
Business Review, May–June 1990.
7. Borsodi, R., The Distribution Age, D. Appleton & Co, 1929.
8. Holweg, M. and Pil, F.K., The Second Century, MIT Press, 2004.
 
 
27
Earlier in Chapter 1 the mission of logistics management was defined simply in 
terms of providing the means whereby customers’ service requirements are met 
at lowest cost. In other words the ultimate purpose of any logistics system is to 
satisfy customers. It is a simple idea that is not always easy to recognise if you are 
a manager involved in activities such as production scheduling or inventory control 
which may seem to be some distance away from the marketplace. The fact is of 
course that everybody in the organisation has a stake in customer service. Indeed 
many successful companies have started to examine their internal service stand-
ards in order that everyone who works in the business understands that they must 
service someone – if they don’t, why are they on the payroll?
 The objective should be to establish a chain of customers that links people at all 
levels in the organisation directly or indirectly to the marketplace. 1  Xerox is a com-
pany that has worked hard to implement the idea of the internal customer. They 
have even extended the idea to the point of linking bonuses to an index of customer 
satisfaction. In organisations like Xerox, managing the customer service chain 
through the business and onwards is the central concern of logistics management.
Logistics and  
customer value 2
M MThe marketing and logistics interface
M MDelivering customer value
M MWhat is customer service?
M MThe impact of out-of-stock
M MCustomer service and customer retention
M MMarket-driven supply chains
M MDefining customer service objectives
M MSetting customer service priorities
M MSetting service standards