--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 
 
 
www.GetPedia.com
*More than 150,000 articles in the 
search database 
*Learn how almost everything 
works 
 
 
--- PAGE 2 ---
The Toyota Way: 14 Management Principles from the
World's Greatest Manufacturer
by Jeffrey K. Liker  ISBN:0071392319
McGraw-Hill © 2004 (352 pages)
This book explains the management principles and
business philosophy behind Toyota's worldwide
reputation for quality and reliability. It also shows
managers in every industry how to improve business
processes.
 
Table of Contents 
The Toyota Way 14 Management Principles from the World s Greatest
Manufacturer 
Preface 
Part One  - The World-Class Power of the Toyota Way
Ch
apt
er
1
- The Toyota Way: Using Operational Excellence as a Strategic
Weapon
Ch
apt
er
2
- How Toyota Became the World s Best Manufacturer: The Story
of the Toyoda Family and the Toyota Production System
Ch
apt
er
3
- The Heart of the Toyota Production System: Eliminating Waste
Ch
apt
er
4
- The 14 Principles of the Toyota Way: An Executive Summary of
the Culture Behind TPS
Ch
apt
er
5
- The Toyota Way in Action: The  No Compromises  Development
of Lexus
Ch
apt
er
6
- The Toyota Way in Action: New Century, New Fuel, New Design
Process Prius
Part Two  - The Business Principles of the Toyota Way
Se
cti
on
I
- Long-Term Philosophy
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 3 ---
Ch
apt
er
7
- Principle 1: Base Your Management Decisions on a Long-Term
Philosophy, Even at the Expense of Short-Term Financial Goals
Se
cti
on
II
- The Right Process Will Produce the Right Results
Ch
apt
er
8
- Principle 2: Create Continuous Process Flow to Bring Problems to
the Surface
Ch
apt
er
9
- Principle 3: Use  Pull  Systems to Avoid Overproduction
Ch
apt
er
10
- Principle 4: Level Out the Workload (Heijunka )
Ch
apt
er
11
- Principle 5: Build a Culture of Stopping to Fix Problems, to Get
Quality Right the First Time
Ch
apt
er
12
- Principle 6: Standardized Tasks Are the Foundation for
Continuous Improvement and Employee Empowerment
Ch
apt
er
13
- Principle 7: Use Visual Control So No Problems Are Hidden
Ch
apt
er
14
- Principle 8: Use Only Reliable, Thoroughly Tested Technology
That Serves Your People and Processes
Se
cti
on
III
- Add Value to the Organization by Developing Your People and
Partners
Ch
apt
er
15
- Principle 9: Grow Leaders Who Thoroughly Understand the
Work, Live the Philosophy, and Teach It to Others
Ch
apt
er
16
- Principle 10: Develop Exceptional People and Teams Who Follow
Your Company s Philosophy
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 4 ---
Ch
apt
er
17
- Principle 11: Respect Your Extended Network of Partners and
Suppliers by Challenging Them and Helping Them Improve
Se
cti
on
IV
- Continuously Solving Root Problems Drives Organizational
Learning
Ch
apt
er
18
- Principle 12: Go and See for Yourself to Thoroughly Understand
the Situation (Genchi Genbutsu )
Ch
apt
er
19
- Principle 13: Make Decisions Slowly by Consensus,Thoroughly
Considering All Options; Implement Rapidly (Nemawashi )
Ch
apt
er
20
- Principle 14: Become a Learning Organization Through Relentless
Reflection (Hansei ) and Continuous Improvement (Kaizen )
Part Three  - Applying the Toyota Way in Your Organization
Ch
apt
er
21
- Using the Toyota Way to Transform Technical and Service
Organizations
Ch
apt
er
22
- Build Your Own Lean Learning Enterprise, Borrowing from the
Toyota Way
Bibliography/Chapter References 
Recommended for Further Reading 
Index 
List of Figures 
List of Sidebars 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 5 ---
Back Cover
 
What Can Your Business Learn From Toyota?
 
• Double or triple the speed of any business process 
• Build quality into workplace systems 
• Eliminate the huge costs of hidden waste 
• Turn every employee into a quality control inspector 
With a market capitalization greater than the value of General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler combined, Toyota is also,
(by far), the world s most profitable automaker. Toyota s well-known  secret weapon  is Lean production the
revolutionary approach to business processes that it invented in the 1950s and has spend decades perfecting. Less
well known are the management principles that underlie Lean production, Lean product development, and all of
Toyota s business and service processes. Today businesses around the world are attempting to implement Toyota s
radical system for speeding up processes, reducing waste, and improving quality. But are they getting beneath the
surface of Lean tools and techniques to the real foundation of Toyota s success?
 
The Toyota Way, explains Toyota s unique approach to Lean management the 14 principles that drive Toyota s
quality and efficiency-obsessed culture. You ll gain valuable insights that can be applied to any organization and any
business process, whether in services or manufacturing. You ll discover how the right combination of long-term
philosophy, processes, people, and problem solving can transform your organization into a Lean, learning enterprise
the Toyota Way.
 
About the Author 
Jeffrey K. Liker, Ph.D., is Professor of Industrial and Operations Engineering at the University of Michigan, and
cofounder and Director of the Japan Technology Management Program and the Lean Manufacturing and Product
Development Certificate Program at the university. Winner of four Shingo Prizes for Excellence, Dr. Liker s writings
on Toyota have appeared in The Harvard Business Review, Sloan Management Review, and other leading
publications. Dr. Liker is a principal of Optiprise, a Lean enterprise/supply chain management consulting firm, and
was the editor of Becoming Lean: Experiences of U.S. Manufacturers, which won the 1998 Shigeo Shingo prize
for excellence in manufacturing research.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 6 ---
The Toyota Way 14 Management
Principles from the World s
Greatest Manufacturer
Jeffrey K. Liker 
McGraw-Hill 
Copyright © 2004 by McGraw-Hill. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Except as
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or
distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 AGM/AGM 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 
ISBN 0-07-139231-9 
Editorial and production services provided by CWL Publishing Enterprises, Inc., Madison, WI, www.cwlpub.com.  
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered.
It is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or
other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought.
 
 From a Declaration of Principles jointly adopted by a Committee 
of the American Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers 
McGraw-Hill books are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in
corporate training programs. For more information, please write to the Director of Special Sales, McGraw-Hill, Two
Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2298. Or contact your local bookstore.
 
This book is printed on recycled, acid-free paper containing a minimum of 50% recycled de-inked fiber.
 
Dedication 
To Deb, Emma, and Jesse 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 7 ---
and Our Amazing Life Journey 
Foreword 
When I joined Toyota after 18 years in the U.S. automobile business, I didn t know exactly what to expect. But I
was hopeful. I knew that I wasn t comfortable with the direction that American automobile manufacturing was taking,
and I felt Toyota might be different. In no time at all I noticed a fundamental difference between Toyota and my
previous employers. At a Toyota/GM joint venture plant in Fremont, California, called NUMMI (New United Motor
Manufacturing), I witnessed the transformation of a workforce from one of the worst in the General Motors system
to one of the best in any manufacturing facility in the United States. The difference was the  Toyota Way.  In this
book, Dr. Liker explains the management systems, thinking, and philosophy that form the foundation of Toyota s
success, providing the reader with valuable insights that can be applied to any business or situation. While there are
many books that provide insight into the tools and methods of Toyota s Production System (TPS), Professor Liker s
book is unique in its explanation of the broader principles at work in the Toyota culture.
 
The Toyota Way is not the Japanese Way or the American Way or even the Gary Convis Way of managing. It is the
fundamental way that Toyota views its world and does business. The Toyota Way, along with the Toyota Production
System, make up Toyota s  DNA.  This DNA was born with the founders of our company and continues to be
developed and nurtured in our current and future leaders.
 
The Toyota Way can be briefly summarized through the two pillars that support it:  Continuous Improvement  and 
Respect for People.  Continuous improvement, often called kaizen, defines Toyota s basic approach to doing
business. Challenge everything. More important than the actual improvements that individuals contribute, the true
value of continuous improvement is in creating an atmosphere of continuous learning and an environment that not
only accepts, but actually embraces change. Such an environment can only be created where there is respect for
people hence the second pillar of the Toyota Way. Toyota demonstrates this respect by providing employment
security and seeking to engage team members through active participation in improving their jobs. As managers, we
must take the responsibility for developing and nurturing mutual trust and understanding among all team members. I
believe management has no more critical role than to motivate and engage large numbers of people to work together
toward a common goal. Defining and explaining what the goal is, sharing a path to achieving it, motivating people to
take the journey with you, and assisting them by removing obstacles those are management s reasons for being. We
must engage the minds of people to support and contribute their ideas to the organization. In my experience, the
Toyota Way is the best method for fulfilling this role. 
However, readers of this book should understand that each organization must develop its own way of doing business.
The Toyota Way is the special product of the people who created Toyota and its unique history. Toyota is one of the
most successful companies in the world. I hope this book will give you an understanding of what has made Toyota
successful, and some practical ideas that you can use to develop your own approach to business.
 
 Gary Convis
Managing Officer of Toyota and President,
Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky
 
Acknowledgments 
This book is the product of 20 years of study of Toyota. Much of that work was done under the auspices of the
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 8 ---
Japan Technology Management Program at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, where I am currently Director. This
program was started in 1991 with generous funding through the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR), but it really began with the vision of Senator Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico. Senator Bingaman worked
behind the scenes to get the funding to support university programs like mine to learn from Japan, send technically
oriented students to Japan on internships, and share what we learned with others in the United States. At that time in
the late  80s and early  90s, the  learning trade imbalance  was huge with most of the learning going from the U.S. to
Japan and little coming back. There were many reasons for this, but one was that the U.S. did not want to listen. The
phenomenal success of companies like Toyota woke us up, and Toyota has contributed greatly to bringing more
balance into the exchange of learning. 
Toyota has been remarkably open in sharing its source of competitive advantage with the rest of the world. A
milestone was Eiji Toyoda s decision in 1982 when, as chairman, he, along with Shoichiro Toyoda, President,
approved the agreement with GM to create NUMMI, a joint auto manufacturing venture specifically intended to
teach the  Toyota Way  to GM. That meant sharing Toyota s crown jewel, the famous Toyota Production System,
with its principal global competitor. Another milestone in opening up TPS to the world was the decision to create the
Toyota Supplier Support Center in 1992 for the purpose of teaching the Toyota Production System to U.S.
companies by setting up working models in plants across industries. I personally benefited from this remarkable
openness.
 
Unfortunately, I cannot acknowledge all of the individuals at Toyota who graciously agreed to lengthy interviews and
reviewed parts of this book for accuracy. 
But several were particularly influential in my learning about the Toyota Way. These included (job titles are from the
time of the interviews):
 
•
Bruce Brownlee, General Manager, Corporate Planning and External Affairs of the Toyota Technical Center
my key liaison for the book.
 
•
Jim Olson, Senior Vice President, Toyota Motor Manufacturing North America carefully considered the
Toyota Way book and then supported Toyota s full participation to get it right.
 
•
Jim Wiseman, Vice President, Toyota Motor Manufacturing, North America opened the doors to the Toyota
Production System in manfacturing.
 
•
Irv Miller, Group Vice President, Toyota Motor Sales opened the door to the world of sales and distribution
at Toyota.
 
•
Fujio Cho, President of Toyota Motor Company shared his passion for the Toyota Way.
 
•
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 9 ---
Gary Convis, President of Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky and Managing Officer of Toyota  helped
me understand the process of an American learning the depths of the Toyota Way.
 
•
Toshiaki (Tag) Taguchi, President and CEO of Toyota Motor North America provided insights into the
Toyota Way in Sales.
 
•
Jim Press, Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of Toyota Motor Sales, USA gave me
deep insights into the philosophy of the Toyota Way.
 
•
Al Cabito, Group Vice President, Sales Administration, Toyota Motor Sales, USA provided great insights
into Toyota s emerging build-to-order strategy.
 
•
Tadashi (George) Yamashina, President, Toyota Technical Center, USA introduced me to hourensou and a
deeper appreciation of genchi genbutsu.
 
•
Kunihiko (Mike) Masaki, former President, Toyota Technical Center took every opportunity to get me in the
door at Toyota to study the Toyota Way.
 
•
Dave Baxter, Vice President, Toyota Technical Center shared more hours than I had a right to ask for
explaining Toyota s product development system and its underlying philosophy.
 
•
Ed Mantey, Vice President, Toyota Technical Center Ed is a real engineer who is living proof Toyota can
train American engineers who deeply understand the Toyota Way.
 
•
Dennis Cuneo, Senior Vice President, Toyota Motor North America drew on his wealth of experience at
NUMMI and beyond and helped me understand Toyota s commitment to social responsibility.
 
•
Dick Mallery, Partner, Snell and Wilmer passionately described how as a lawyer for Toyota he has been
transformed by the Toyota Way. 
•
Don Jackson, Vice President, Manufacturing, Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky explained and
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 10 ---
demonstrated what it means to respect and involve workers on the shop floor.
 
•
Glenn Uminger, Assistant General Manager, Business Management & Logistics Production Control, Toyota
Motor Manufacturing, North America, Inc explained how an accountant at Toyota could develop a TPS
support office and then lead logistics for North America having fun at every step.
 
•
Teruyuki Minoura, former President, Toyota Motor Manufacturing, North America chilled me with real life
stories of learning TPS at the feet of the master Taiichi Ohno.
 
•
Steve Hesselbrock, Vice President Operations, Trim Masters shared generously of his years of learning to be
one of the best Toyota seat suppliers in the world through trial by fire.
 
•
Kiyoshi Imaizumi, President Trim Masters gave me the real story on what it took to be a Toyota supplier in
Japan.
 
•
Ichiro Suzuki, former Chief Engineer, Lexus and Executive Advisory Engineer showed me what a real super
engineer can be.
 
•
Takeshi Uchiyamada, Senior Managing Director and former Chief Engineer, Prius taught me what it means to
lead a revolutionary project (Prius) by working through people.
 
•
Jane Beseda, GM and VP North American Parts Operations articulated for me the Toyota Way view of
information technology and automation in a way that made the light bulbs come on.
 
•
Ken Elliott, Service Parts Center National Manager shared his story of building the Toyota Way culture in a
new parts distribution center.
 
•
Andy Lund, Program Manager, Sienna, Toyota Technical Center shared insights into the translation of
Toyota s culture in Japan into U.S. operations from the perspective of an American who grew up in Japan.
 
•
Jim Griffith, Vice President, Toyota Technical Center always with humor corrected misconceptions and
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 11 ---
challenged my understanding of the Toyota Way.
 
•
Chuck Gulash, Vice President, Toyota Technical Center on a test-track drive taught me  attention to detail  in
vehicle evaluation.
 
•
Ray Tanguay, President, Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Canada taught me that technological innovation and
TPS can go hand in hand.
 
I owe a special debt to John Shook, the former Toyota manager who helped start up NUMMI, the Toyota Technical
Center, and the Toyota Supplier Support Center. John has dedicated his career to understanding the Toyota Way.
He brought this passion to the University of Michigan where he joined us for several years as Director of our Japan
Technology Management Program and continues to be a leader in the Lean community. John was my mentor on
TPS, teaching me first the basics and then, as I developed my understanding, the ever more sophisticated lessons in
the philosophy of the Toyota Way. 
Most of this book was written in 2003 when I was privileged to spend a very cold East Coast winter in sunny and
warm Phoenix visiting my former student and now Professor Tom Choi of Arizona State University. With a nice,
private office without windows in the mornings and afternoons of golf, it was the perfect climate for writing. The
four-month adventure with my loving wife Deborah and my children Jesse and Emma is a once-in-a-lifetime memory.
 
This book looks beyond Toyota s Production System across the company, including parts logistics and supply chain
management. My understanding of  lean logistics  has been greatly enhanced by research funded by the Sloan
Foundation s Trucking Industry Program, led by my close friend and colleague Chelsea (Chip) White at Georgia
Institute of Technology.
 
Finally, I had a lot of editing and writing help. When informed by my publisher that my book was twice as long as
allowable, in a panic I called my former developmental editor, Gary Peurasaari, to bail me out. He worked his magic
on every page in this book, reorganizing content where necessary, but more importantly, and in the true Toyota Way
fashion, he eliminated wasted words, bringing value-added words to life. He was more of a partner in writing than an
editor. Then Richard Narramore, the editor at McGraw-Hill who asked me to write the book, lead me through a
second major rewrite bringing the book to a new level. It is a testimony to the Toyota Way that these two individuals
got so engrossed in the book they spent night and day painstakingly helping to craft the right words to describe this
precious philosophy of management.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 12 ---
Preface
In 1982 when I first arrived as a new assistant professor at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, the automotive
industry was in serious turmoil in the midst of a national recession. The situation seemed dire. The Ford Motor
company was seriously flirting with bankruptcy. The Big 3 were losing market share fast. 
There was a lot of debate at the time over the root cause. The party line among Detroit auto executives was that the
cause was the  Japanese invasion.  Japan, Inc. had banded together with industry and government colluding to set up
trade barriers to prevent American cars from being sold in Japan and artificially lowering prices of Japanese cars in
the United States. Of course, in the minds of U.S. companies, as long as the root cause was unfair business practices,
there was no need to seriously change the way they built cars. Instead, political channels would right the wrongs.
 
Around this time I was fortunate to be invited by David Cole and Robert Cole (two University of Michigan
professors who were leading the study of the Japanese quality movement) to work on a U.S.-Japan automotive
study. This research was an effort to help U.S. companies learn from the Japanese automakers. My project focused
on how automakers worked with their suppliers on new product development in the U.S. and Japan. The numerous
studies that made up the overall U.S.-Japan auto study covered many aspects of the industry, and all the studies
collectively pointed to a single conclusion. Whatever was going on with Japan s government and the value of the yen
and other macro-economic factors, Japanese auto companies were very good at engineering and building cars. They
were not necessarily financial or marketing whizzes. They were not the leaders in advanced manufacturing
technology, at least not in complex automation. They  designed in quality  and built in quality at every step of the
process, and they did it with remarkably few labor hours. Not only were Japan s automakers good, their top
suppliers were also world class in engineering and manufacturing, and they worked together as a team.
 
But even in these early stages of my introduction to the auto industry in Japan, there were indications that Toyota was
different from the other Japanese automakers. While the basic product development process seemed similar across
the three automakers, and the top tier suppliers were all integrally part of the product development process, there
was a sense of partnership between Toyota and its suppliers that we did not see as strongly in the keiretsu of Mazda
and Nissan.
 
Later, in 1991 John Campbell and I received a grant to create the Japan Technology Management Program at the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, which I am still directing. The goals of this program are to learn about the
practices that have helped the best Japanese companies become strong globally, teach what we learn to our students
and industry, and encourage technically oriented students to learn about Japanese language and culture through
courses and internships in Japan. This research program allowed me to continue my studies of the Japanese auto
industry, and I chose to focus more intensively on Toyota, in particular its product development process and the
Toyota Production System. The U.S. government grant focused on transfer of learning so I began studying Toyota s
efforts to transfer its practices to its U.S.-based subsidiaries and American companies  efforts to learn from Toyota.
 
By the early 1990s all of the Big 3 auto producers had woken up to the reality of Japanese quality and concluded
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 13 ---
that Toyota was the company to beat. They were all actively studying Toyota and creating their own versions of
Toyota s systems. They benchmarked the company on its production system, product development system, and
supplier relationship management. Their great interest in Toyota s systems has given me an opportunity to teach about
Toyota s production system and product development process, and get my hands dirty consulting to implement these
systems. I have had opportunities to work in America, the United Kingdom, and Mexico in industries including
automotive, paint manufacturing, nuclear fuel rod assembly, ship building, ship repair, an engineering professional
organization, and lawncare equipment. I have taught lean change agents from over one thousand companies
worldwide, and my participation in lean transformation has given me a deeper understanding of what is involved in
transforming a culture and learning from Toyota. 
My studies of U.S. companies working to implement versions of the Toyota Production System led to a book I
edited called Becoming Lean: Experiences of U.S. Manufacturers (Liker, 1997), winner of a Shingo Prize (in
honor of Shigeo Shingo who helped create the TPS) in 1998. Articles I co-authored on Toyota s product
development system and supplier management in Sloan Management Review and Harvard Business Review also
won Shingo Prizes. But it was not until I was invited to write The Toyota Way that I had an opportunity to pull
together in one volume 20 years of observations of Toyota and companies learning from Toyota. 
Reading this book might give you the impression that I am a strong advocate for Toyota. As a professor and social
scientist, I work at being objective, but I will admit I am a fan of the Toyota Way. I believe Toyota has raised
continuous improvement and employee involvement to a unique level, creating one of the few examples of a genuine
learning enterprise in human history not a small accomplishment. 
Much of the research behind this book has come from 20 years of visits to Japan and interviews in Toyota facilities
there and in the United States. When I was asked to write this book, I immediately asked Toyota for support through
additional interviews specifically focused on the Toyota Way. They graciously agreed. As it turned out, they had just
launched their own internal version of the Toyota Way to keep the  Toyota DNA  strong as they globalize and entrust
international team members to run subsidiaries. This was the pet project of Fujio Cho, President of Toyota Motor
Company, who learned the Toyota Way from one of its inventors, Taiichi Ohno, and he agreed to a rare, personal
interview. I asked him what was unique about Toyota s remarkable success. His answer was quite simple.
 
The key to the Toyota Way and what makes Toyota stand out is not any of the individual elements.... But
what is important is having all the elements together as a system. It must be practiced every day in a very
consistent manner not in spurts. 
Over a one-year period I was able to interview over 40 Toyota managers and executives from manufacturing, sales,
product development, logistics, service parts, and production engineering. I gathered over 120 hours of interviews, all
transcribed. Included in these interviews were several former Toyota managers who left to apply what they learned to
U.S. Companies and several suppliers to Toyota. I visited many Toyota plants, supplier plants, Toyota s sales
offices, a parts distribution center, a supplied parts cross-dock, the Arizona proving ground, and the Toyota
Technical Center. 
I have thought about what impact I would like to make on readers of The Toyota Way. First, I have had a special
opportunity to get inside the culture of a unique and high performing company and wish to share my insights. Second,
Toyota is a model to many companies throughout the world so I wish to provide a different look at what makes
Toyota so successful. The fundamental insight I have from my studies of Toyota is that its success derives from
balancing the role of people in an organizational culture that expects and values their continuous improvements, with a
technical system focused on high-value-added  flow.  This leads to my third and more challenging goal: to help other
companies learn from Toyota and themselves so they can continuously improve on what they do.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 14 ---
To capture the complexity of the Toyota Way and the Toyota Production System (TPS), I divided the book into
three parts. Part One  introduces you to the present success and history of Toyota. It describes how TPS evolved as
a new paradigm of manufacturing, transforming businesses across industries. As a way of showing the Toyota Way in
action, you will see how the Toyota Way was applied to the development of the Lexus and the Prius. In Part Two  I
cover the 14 principles of the Toyota Way that I identified through my research. These key principles drive the
techniques and tools of the Toyota Production System and the management of Toyota in general. The 14 principles
are divided into four sections: 
•
Long-Term Philosophy. Toyota is serious about long-term thinking. The focus from the very top of the
company is to add value to customers and society. This drives a long-term approach to building a learning
organization, one that can adapt to changes in the environment and survive as a productive organization.
Without this foundation, none of the investments Toyota makes in continuous improvement and learning
would be possible.
 
•
The Right Process Will Produce the Right Results. Toyota is a process-oriented company. They have
learned through experience what processes work, beginning with the ideal of one-piece flow, (see Chapter 8
for details). Flow is the key to achieving best quality at the lowest cost with high safety and morale. At
Toyota this process focus is built into the company s DNA, and managers believe in their hearts that using the
right process will lead to the results they desire.
 
•
Add Value to the Organization by Developing Your People and Partners. The Toyota Way includes a
set of tools that are designed to support people continuously improving and continuously developing. For
example, one-piece flow is a very demanding process that quickly surfaces problems that demand fast
solutions or production will stop. This suits Toyota s employee development goals perfectly because it gives
people the sense of urgency needed to confront business problems. The view of management at Toyota is
that they build people, not just cars.
 
•
Continuously Solving Root Problems Drives Organizational Learning. The highest level of the Toyota
Way is organizational learning. Identifying root causes of problems and preventing them from occurring is the
focus of Toyota s continuous learning system. Tough analysis, reflection, and communication of lessons
learned are central to improvement as is the discipline to standardize the best-known practices.
 
Part Three  of the book discusses how organizations can apply the Toyota Way and what actions they can take to
become a lean, learning organization. One chapter focuses specifically on applying Toyota Way principles to service
organizations that do not manufacture products. 
Understanding Toyota s success and quality improvement systems does not automatically mean you can transform a
company with a different culture and circumstances. Toyota can provide inspiration, demonstrate the importance of
stability in leadership and values that go beyond short-term profit, and suggest how the right combination of
philosophy, process, people, and problem solving can create a learning enterprise. I believe all manufacturing and
service companies that want to be successful in the long term must become learning enterprises. Toyota is one of the
best models in the world. Though every company must find its own way and learn for itself, understanding the Toyota
Way can be one giant step on that journey.
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 15 ---
 
 Jeffrey K. Liker, Ph.D.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 16 ---
Part One: The World-Class
Power of the Toyota Way
 
Chapter List
 
Chapter 1:  The Toyota Way: Using Operational Excellence as a Strategic Weapon Chapter 2:  How Toyota Became
the World s Best Manufacturer: The Story of the Toyoda Family and the Toyota Production System Chapter 3:  The
Heart of the Toyota Production System: Eliminating Waste Chapter 4:  The 14 Principles of the Toyota Way: An
Executive Summary of the Culture Behind TPS Chapter 5:  The Toyota Way in Action: The  No Compromises
Development of Lexus Chapter 6:  The Toyota Way in Action: New Century, New Fuel, New Design Process Prius 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 17 ---
Chapter 1: The Toyota Way:
Using Operational Excellence as a
Strategic Weapon
 
Overview
 
We place the highest value on actual implementation and taking action. There are many things one doesn t
understand and therefore, we ask them why don t you just go ahead and take action; try to do something?
You realize how little you know and you face your own failures and you simply can correct those failures and
redo it again and at the second trial you realize another mistake or another thing you didn t like so you can
redo it once again. So by constant improvement, or, should I say, the improvement based upon action, one
can rise to the higher level of practice and knowledge. 
 Fujio Cho, President, Toyota Motor Corporation, 2002
 
Toyota first caught the world s attention in the 1980s, when it became clear that there was something special about
Japanese quality and efficiency. Japanese cars were lasting longer than American cars and required much less repair.
And by the 1990s it became apparent that there was something even more special about Toyota compared to other
automakers in Japan (Womack, Jones, and Roos, 1991). It was not eye-popping car designs or performance though
the ride was smooth and the designs often very refined. It was the way Toyota engineered and manufactured the
autos that led to unbelievable consistency in the process and product. Toyota designed autos faster, with more
reliability, yet at a competitive cost, even when paying the relatively high wages of Japanese workers. Equally
impressive was that every time Toyota showed an apparent weakness and seemed vulnerable to the competition,
Toyota miraculously fixed the problem and came back even stronger. Today Toyota is the third-largest auto
manufacturer in the world, behind General Motors and Ford, with global vehicle sales of over six million per year in
170 countries. However, Toyota is far more profitable than any other auto manufacturer. Auto industry analysts
estimate that Toyota will pass Ford in global vehicles sold in 2005, and if current trends continue, it will eventually
pass GM to become the largest automaker in the world. 
Every automotive industry insider and many consumers are familiar with Toyota s dramatic business success and
world-leading quality:
 
•
Toyota s annual profit at the end of its fiscal year in March 2003, was $8.13 billion larger than the combined
earnings of GM, Chrysler, and Ford, and the biggest annual profit for any auto maker in at least a decade. Its
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 18 ---
net profit margin is 8.3 times higher than the industry average.
 
•
While stock prices of the Big 3 were falling in 2003, Toyota s shares had increased 24% over 2002. Toyota
s market capitalization (the total value of the company s stock) was $105 billion as of 2003 higher than the
combined market capitalization of Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler. This is an amazing statistic. Its return
on assets is 8 times higher than the industry average. The company has made a profit every year over the last
25 years and has $20-$30 billion in its cash war chest on a consistent basis. 
•
Toyota has for decades been the number one automaker in Japan and a distant fourth behind the  Big 3 
automakers in North America. But in August of 2003, for the first time, Toyota sold more vehicles in North
America than one of the  Big 3  automakers (Chrysler). It seems that Toyota could eventually become a
permanent member of the  Big 3  U.S. automakers. (Of 1.8 million Toyota/Lexus vehicles sold in North
America in 2002, 1.2 million were made in North America. Toyota is rapidly building new production
capacity in the U.S., at a time when U.S. manufacturers are looking for opportunities to close plants, reduce
capacity and move production abroad.) 
•
In 2003 the Toyota nameplate was on track to sell more vehicles in the U.S. than either of the two
brandnames that have led U.S. sales for the past 100 years Ford and Chevrolet. Camry was the top-selling
U.S. passenger car in 2003 and five of the years prior. Corolla was the top selling small car in the world.
 
•
Toyota not long ago was known for making small, basic transportation vehicles, yet in ten years leaped out to
become the leader in luxury vehicles. Lexus was introduced in 1989 and in 2002 outsold BMW, Cadillac,
and Mercedes-Benz in the U.S. for the third year in a row.
 
•
Toyota invented  lean production  (also known as  the Toyota Production System  or  TPS ), which has
triggered a global transformation in virtually every industry to Toyota s manufacturing and supply chain
philosophy and methods over the last decade. The Toyota Production System is the foundation of dozens of
books on  lean  including two bestsellers: The Machine That Changed the World: The Story of Lean
Production (Womack, Jones, Roos, 1991) and Lean Thinking (Womack, Jones, 1996). Toyota
employees are sought out by companies in almost every industry throughout the world for their expertise. 
•
Toyota has the fastest product development process in the world. New cars and trucks take 12 months or
less to design, while competitors typically require two to three years.
 
•
Toyota is benchmarked as the best in class by all of its peers and competitors throughout the world for high
quality, high productivity, manufacturing speed, and flexibility. Toyota automobiles have consistently been at
the top of quality rankings by J.D. Powers and Associates, Consumer Reports, and others for many years. 
Much of Toyota s success comes from its astounding quality reputation. Consumers know that they can count on
their Toyota vehicle to work right the first time and keep on working, while most U.S. and European automotive
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 19 ---
companies produce vehicles that may work when new but almost certainly will spend time in the shop in a year or so.
In 2003 Toyota recalled 79% fewer vehicles in the U.S. than Ford and 92% fewer than Chrysler. According to a
2003 study in Consumer Reports, one of the most widely read magazines for auto-buying customers, 15 of the top
38 most reliable models from any manufacturer over the last seven years were made by Toyota/Lexus. No other
manufacturer comes close. GM, Mercedes, and BMW have no cars on this list. Not a single Toyota is on the
dreaded  vehicles to avoid  list, while a handful of Fords, almost 50 percent of the GMs, and more than 50 percent of
the Chryslers are to be avoided, according to Consumer Reports. 
Here are some other statistics from Consumer Reports  2003 annual auto issue: 
•
In the small car category (Toyota Corolla, Ford Focus/Escort, GM Cavalier, and Chrysler Neon), Toyota
won each of the last three years for overall reliability, as well as the prior three years, and predicted reliability
for the 2003 model year.
 
•
For family sedans, the Toyota Camry beat out the Ford Taurus, the GM Malibu, and Dodge Intrepid,
winning in the last three years, the three prior years, and predicted reliability for the 2003 model year.
 
•
More than half of all Toyota used cars are singled out as  recommended for purchase,  compared with less
than 10 percent of the Fords, 5 percent of the GMs, and none of the Chryslers. 
•
Toyota/Lexus has also dominated the J.D. Powers  initial quality  and long-term durability rankings for years.
Toyota s Lexus was again the #1 most reliable car, according to the J.D. Powers 2003 quality survey,
followed by Porsche, BMW, and Honda. 
What is the secret of Toyota s success? The incredible consistency of Toyota s performance is a direct result of
operational excellence. Toyota has turned operational excellence into a strategic weapon. This operational excellence
is based in part on tools and quality improvement methods made famous by Toyota in the manufacturing world, such
as just-in-time, kaizen, one-piece flow, jidoka, and heijunka. These techniques helped spawn the  lean manufacturing 
revolution. But tools and techniques are no secret weapon for transforming a business. Toyota s continued success at
implementing these tools stems from a deeper business philosophy based on its understanding of people and human
motivation. Its success is ultimately based on its ability to cultivate leadership, teams, and culture, to devise strategy,
to build supplier relationships, and to maintain a learning organization. 
This book describes 14 principles which, based on my 20 years of studying the company, constitute the  Toyota
Way.  These 14 principles are also the foundation of the Toyota Production System (TPS) practiced at Toyota
manufacturing plants around the world. For ease of understanding, I have divided the principles into four categories,
all starting with  P  Philosophy, Process, People/Partners, and Problem Solving (see Figure 1-1 ). (For an executive
summary of the 14 principles of the Toyota Way, see chapter 4 .)
 
About the same time that I started writing this book, Toyota was unveiling its own internal  Toyota Way  document
for training purposes. This document greatly influenced my thinking about the 14 principles and consequently I have
incorporated the four high-level principles from that document (Genchi Genbutsu, Kaizen, Respect and Teamwork,
and Challenge) and correlated them to my four principle categories of Philosophy, Process, People/Partners, and
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 20 ---
Problem Solving (see Figure 1-1 ). 
Figure 1-1: A  4 P  model of the Toyota Way 
The Toyota Way and the Toyota Production System (Toyota s manufacturing method) are the double helix of Toyota
s DNA; they define its management style and what is unique about the company. In this book I hope to explain and
show how the Toyota model of success can be applied in any organization, to improve any business process, from
sales to product development, marketing, logistics, and management. To assist you in this journey, I offer numerous
examples of what Toyota does to maintain such a high level of achievement as well as explore companies from a
variety of industries and service operations that have effectively applied Toyota s principles. 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 21 ---
The Toyota Production System (TPS) and Lean
Production
The Toyota Production System is Toyota s unique approach to manufacturing. It is the basis for much of the  lean
production  movement that has dominated manufacturing trends (along with Six Sigma) for the last 10 years or so.
Despite the huge influence of the lean movement, I hope to show in this book that most attempts to implement lean
have been fairly superficial. The reason is that most companies have focused too heavily on tools such as 5S and
just-in-time, without understanding lean as an entire system that must permeate an organization s culture. In most
companies where lean is implemented, senior management is not involved in the day-to-day operations and
continuous improvement that are part of lean. Toyota s approach is very different. 
What exactly is a lean enterprise? You could say it s the end result of applying the Toyota Production System to all
areas of your business. In their excellent book, Lean Thinking, James Womack and Daniel Jones define lean
manufacturing as a five-step process: defining customer value, defining the value stream, making it  flow,   pulling 
from the customer back, and striving for excellence. To be a lean manufacturer requires a way of thinking that
focuses on making the product flow through value-adding processes without interruption (one-piece flow), a  pull 
system that cascades back from customer demand by replenishing only what the next operation takes away at short
intervals, and a culture in which everyone is striving continuously to improve.
 
Taiichi Ohno, founder of TPS, said it even more succinctly:
 
All we are doing is looking at the time line from the moment the customer gives us an order to the point when
we collect the cash. And we are reducing that time line by removing the non-value-added wastes. (Ohno,
1988) 
As we will see in more detail in Chapter 2 , Toyota developed the Toyota Production System after World War II at a
time when it faced very different business conditions than Ford and GM. While Ford and GM used mass production,
economies of scale, and big equipment to produce as many parts as possible, as cheaply as possible, Toyota s
market in post-war Japan was small. Toyota also had to make a variety of vehicles on the same assembly line to
satisfy its customers. Thus, the key to their operations was flexibility. This helped Toyota make a critical discovery:
when you make lead times short and focus on keeping production lines flexible, you actually get higher quality, better
customer responsiveness, better productivity, and better utilization of equipment and space. While Ford s traditional
mass production looks good when you measure the cost per piece on an individual machine, what customers want is
a much greater variety of choices than traditional manufacturing can offer cost-effectively. Toyota s focus in the
1940s and  50s on eliminating wasted time and material from every step of the production process from raw material
to finished goods was designed to address the same conditions most companies face today: the need for fast,
flexible processes that give customers what they want, when they want it, at the highest quality and
affordable cost. 
A focus on  flow  has continued to be a foundation for Toyota s success globally in the 21st century. Companies like
Dell have also become famous for using short lead times, high inventory turns, and getting paid fast to rapidly develop
a fast growing company. But even Dell is just beginning on the road to becoming the sophisticated  lean enterprise 
that Toyota has developed through decades of learning and hard work.
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 22 ---
 
Unfortunately, most companies are still using the mass production techniques that worked so well for Henry Ford in
the 1920s, when flexibility and customer choice were not important. The mass production focus on efficiency of
individual processes goes back to Frederick Taylor and his  scientific management  at the beginning of the 20th
century. Like the creators of the Toyota Production System, Taylor tried to eliminate waste from production
processes. He observed workers and tried to eliminate every second of inefficient motion. Mass production thinkers
have long understood that machine downtime is another obvious non-value-added waste a machine shut down for
repair is not making parts that could make money. But consider the following counter-intuitive truths about
non-value-added waste within the philosophy of TPS.
 
•
Often the best thing you can do is to idle a machine and stop producing parts. You do this to avoid
over production, the fundamental waste in TPS.
 
•
Often it is best to build up an inventory of finished goods in order to level out the production
schedule, rather than produce according to the actual fluctuating demand of customer orders.
Leveling out the schedule (heijunka) is a foundation for flow and pull systems and for minimizing inventory in
the supply chain. (Leveling production means smoothing out the volume and mix of items produced so there
is little variation in production from day to day.) 
•
Often it is best to selectively add and substitute overhead for direct labor. When waste is stripped away
from your value-adding workers, you need to provide high-quality support for them as you would support a
surgeon performing a critical operation. 
•
It may not be a top priority to keep your workers busy making parts as fast as possible. You should
produce parts at the rate of customer demand. Working faster just for the sake of getting the most out of
your workers is another form of over production and actually leads to employing more labor overall.
 
•
It is best to selectively use information technology and often better to use manual processes even
when automation is available and would seem to justify its cost in reducing your headcount. People
are the most flexible resource you have. If you have not efficiently worked out the manual process, it will not
be clear where you need automation to support the process.
 
In other words, Toyota s solutions to particular problems often seem to add waste rather than eliminate it. The reason
for these seemingly paradoxical solutions is that Ohno had learned from his experiences walking the shop floor a very
particular meaning of non-valued-added waste: it had little to do with running labor and equipment as hard as
possible, and everything to do with the manner in which raw material is transformed into a saleable commodity. For
Ohno, the purpose of his journey through the shop floor was to identify activities that added value to raw material,
and get rid of everything else. He learned to map the value stream of the raw material moving to a finished product
that the customer was willing to pay for. This was a radically different approach from the mass production thinking of
merely identifying, enumerating, and eliminating the wasted time and effort in the existing production processes.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 23 ---
As you make Ohno s journey for yourself, and look at your own organization s processes, you will see materials,
invoicing, service calls, and prototype parts in R&D (you fill in the blank for your business process) being
transformed into something the customer wants. But on closer inspection, they are often being diverted into a pile,
someplace where they sit and wait for long periods of time, until they can be moved to the next process or
transformation. Certainly, people do not like to be diverted from their journeys and to wait on long lines. Ohno
viewed material as having the same degree of impatience. Why? If any large batches of material are produced and
then sit and wait to be processed, if service calls are backed up, if R&D is receiving prototype parts they don t have
time to test, then this sitting and waiting to move to the next operation becomes waste. This results in both your
internal and external customers becoming impatient. This is why TPS starts with the customer, by asking,  What value
are we adding from the customer s perspective?  Because the only thing that adds value in any type of process
be it in manufacturing, marketing, or a development process is the physical or information transformation of
that product, service, or activity into something the customer wants . 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 24 ---
Why Companies Often Think They Are Lean But
Aren t
 
When I first began learning about TPS, I was enamored of the power of one-piece flow. The more I learned about
the benefits of flowing and pulling parts as they were needed, rather than pushing and creating inventory, the more I
wanted to experience the transformation of mass production processes into lean processes first hand. I learned that
all the supporting tools of lean such as quick equipment changeovers, standardized work, pull systems, and error
proofing, were all essential to creating flow. But along the way, experienced leaders within Toyota kept telling me that
these tools and techniques were not the key to TPS. Rather the power behind TPS is a company s management
commitment to continuously invest in its people and promote a culture of continuous improvement. I nodded like I
knew what they were talking about and continued to study how to calculate kanban quantities and set up one-piece
flow cells. After studying Toyota for almost 20 years and observing the struggles companies have had applying lean
manufacturing, what these Toyota teachers (called sensei) told me is finally sinking in. As this book attempts to show,
the Toyota Way consists of far more than just a set of lean tools like  just-in-time. 
Let s say you bought a book on creating one-piece flow cells or perhaps went to a training class or maybe even hired
a lean consultant. You pick a process and do a lean improvement project. A review of the process reveals lots of 
muda  or  waste,  Toyota s term for anything that takes time but does not add value for your customer. Your process
is disorganized and the place is a mess. So you clean it up and straighten out the flow in the process. Everything starts
to flow faster. You get better control over the process. Quality even goes up. This is exciting stuff so you keep doing
it on other parts of the operation. What s so hard about this?
 
I have visited hundreds of organizations that claim to be advanced practitioners of lean methods. They proudly show
off their pet lean project. And they have done good work, no doubt. But having studied Toyota for twenty years it is
clear to me that in comparison they are rank amateurs. It took Toyota decades of creating a lean culture to get to
where they are and they still believe they are just learning to understand  the Toyota Way.  What percent of
companies outside of Toyota and their close knit group of suppliers get an A or even a B+ on lean? I cannot say
precisely but it is far less than 1%. 
The problem is that companies have mistaken a particular set of lean tools for deep  lean thinking.  Lean thinking
based on the Toyota Way involves a far deeper and more pervasive cultural transformation than most companies can
begin to imagine. Starting with a project or two to generate some enthusiasm is the right thing to do. The purpose of
this book is to explain the Toyota culture and the principles it is based on. 
Here is one example of what I find disturbing in the lean movement in the U.S. The Toyota Supplier Support Center
(TSSC) was established by Toyota in the U.S. to work with U.S. companies to teach them TPS. Its leader, Mr.
Hajime Ohba, (a disciple of Taiichi Ohno who founded TPS) fashioned the center after a similar Toyota consulting
organization in Japan. They have worked with many U.S. companies in different industries, in each case doing a  lean
project  which consists of transforming one production line of a company using TPS tools and methods typically in a
6-9 month period. Usually companies come to TSSC and apply for these services; however, in 1996 TSSC took the
unusual step of approaching an industrial sensor manufacturing company that I will call  Lean Company X.  It was
strange that Toyota would offer to help this company because Lean Company X was already widely regarded as a
best-practice example of lean manufacturing. It had become a common tour site for companies wishing to see
world-class manufacturing in the U.S. Lean Company X even won the Shingo Prize for Manufacturing, an American
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 25 ---
based award in honor of Shigeo Shingo, who contributed to the creation of the Toyota Production System. At the
time they agreed to work with TSSC, the plant s world-class manufacturing work included:
 
•
Established production cells
 
•
Problem-solving groups of workers
 
•
Company work time and incentives for worker problem solving
 
•
A learning resource center for employees
 
The Shingo Prize at the time was based largely on showing major improvements in key measures of productivity and
quality. The reason TSSC wanted to work with Lean Company X was for mutual learning, because it was known as
a best-practice example. TSSC agreed to take one product line in this  world-class  plant and use the methods of
TPS to transform it. At the end of the nine-month project, the production line was barely recognizable compared with
its original  world-class  state and had attained a level of  leanness  the plant could not have thought possible. This
production line had leapfrogged the rest of the plant on all key performance measures, including:
 
•
46% reduction in lead-time to produce the product (from 12 to 6.5 hours)
 
•
83% reduction in work-in-process inventory (from 9 to 1.5 hours)
 
•
91% reduction in finished-goods inventory (from 30,500 to 2,890 units)
 
•
50% reduction in overtime (from 10 hours to 5 hours/person-week)
 
•
83% improvement in productivity (from 2.4 to 4.5 pieces/labor hour) 
When I lecture at companies on the Toyota Way, I describe this case and ask,  What does this tell you?  The answer
is always the same:  There is always room for continuous improvement.  But were these improvements small,
incremental continuous improvements?  I ask. No. These were radical improvements. If you look at the original state
of the production line at the beginning of the nine-month project, it is clear from the results that the company was in
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 26 ---
fact far from being world-class 12 days of lead-time to make a sensor, 9 hours of work-in-process, 10 hours
overtime per person-week. The implications of this case (and cases I ve seen even in 2003) are clear and disturbing:
 
•
This  lean plant  was not even close to being lean based on Toyota s standards, despite being nationally
recognized as a lean facility.
 
•
The actual changes implemented by the company before TSSC showed up barely scratched the surface.
 
•
Visitors were coming to the plant convinced they were seeing world-class manufacturing suggesting they did
not have a clue what world-class manufacturing is.
 
•
The award examiners who chose to honor this plant in the name of Shigeo Shingo did not understand any
more than the visitors what the Toyota Production System really is. (They have improved a great deal since
then.)
 
•
Companies are hopelessly behind Toyota in their understanding of TPS and lean.
 
I have visited hundreds of companies and taught employees from over one thousand companies. I have compared
notes with many of those I have taught. I have also visited a number of the U.S. plants that were fortunate to have
received assistance from TSSC, which has consistently helped companies achieve a level of improvement like  Lean
Company X.  Unfortunately, I see a persistent trend in the inability of these companies to implement TPS and lean.
Over time, the lean production line TSSC sets up degrades rather than improves. Little of what Toyota has taught
ultimately is spread to other, less efficient production lines and other parts of the plant. There is a  lean production cell
here and a pull system there and the time it takes to changeover a press to a new product has been reduced, but that
is where the resemblance to an actual Toyota lean model ends. What is going on?
 
The U.S. has been exposed to TPS for at least two decades. The basic concepts and tools are not new. (TPS has
been operating in some form in Toyota for well over 40 years.) The problem, I believe, is that U.S. companies have
embraced lean tools but do not understand what makes them work together in a system. Typically management
adopts a few of these technical tools and even struggles to go beyond the amateurish application of them to create a
technical system. But they do not understand the power behind true TPS: the continuous improvement culture needed
to sustain the principles of the Toyota Way. Within the 4P model 
I mentioned earlier, most companies are dabbling at one level the  Process  level (see Figure 1-2 ). Without adopting
the other 3Ps, they will do little more than dabble because the improvements they make will not have the heart and
intelligence behind them to make them sustainable throughout the company. Their performance will continue to lag
behind those companies that adopt a true culture of continuous improvement.
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 27 ---
 
Figure 1-2: The  4 P  model and where most companies are 
The quote at the beginning of this chapter from Mr. Fujio Cho, President of Toyota, is not just rhetoric. From the
executives  up to  the shop floor workers performing the value-added work, Toyota challenges people to use their
initiative and creativity to experiment and learn. It is interesting that labor advocates and humanists for years have
criticized assembly line work as being oppressive and menial labor, robbing workers of their mental faculties. Yet
when Toyota sets up assembly lines, it selects only the best and brightest workers, and challenges them to grow in
their jobs by constantly solving problems. Similarly, Toyota staffs sales, engineering, service parts, accounting, human
resources, and every aspect of the business with carefully selected individuals and gives them the directive to improve
their processes and find innovative ways to satisfy their customers. Toyota is a true learning organization that has
been evolving and learning for most of a century. This investment in its employees should frighten those traditional
mass production companies that merely focus on making parts and counting quarterly dollars while changing leaders
and organizational structures every few years.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 28 ---
Using the Toyota Way for Long-Term Success
 
Critics often describe Toyota as a  boring company.  This is the kind of boring I like. Top quality year in and year
out. Steadily growing sales. Consistent profitability. Huge cash reserves. Of course, operational efficiency by itself
can be dangerous. Think of the Swiss companies that were so efficient in making mechanical watches yet are now out
of business. Along with operational efficiency you need to be constantly improving and innovating to stay ahead of the
competition and avoid obsolescence. Given its track record, Toyota has accomplished this in spades. 
But despite Toyota s worldwide reputation as the best manufacturer in the world, no business book (in English) has
explained for the general business reader the unique business principles and philosophy that has made the
Toyota/Lexus brand synonymous with quality and reliability. The Toyota Way is the first book to introduce this
thinking outside of Japan. It explains to the managers in any environment blue-collar, white-collar, manufacturing, or
service industry how managers can dramatically improve their business processes by:
 
•
Eliminating wasted time and resources
 
•
Building quality into workplace systems
 
•
Finding low-cost but reliable alternatives to expensive new technology
 
•
Perfecting business processes
 
•
Building a learning culture for continuous improvement
 
The Toyota Way includes profiles of a diverse group of organizations that have had great success in using Toyota s
principles to improve quality, efficiency, and speed. While many people feel it is difficult to apply Toyota s way of
thinking outside of Japan, Toyota is in fact doing just that building learning organizations in many countries throughout
the world to teach the Toyota Way. In fact, I did much of the research for this book in the United States, where
Toyota is on the way to building an autonomous branch of the company led and operated by Americans. 
This book is a blueprint of Toyota s management philosophy. It provides the specific tools and methods that can help
you become the best in your industry on cost, quality, and service. The Toyota Way is a lesson, vision, and
inspiration for any organization that wants to be successful in the long-term.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 29 ---
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 30 ---
Chapter 2: How Toyota Became
the World s Best Manufacturer:
The Story of the Toyoda Family
and the Toyota Production System
 
Overview
 
I plan to cut down on the slack time within work processes and in the shipping of parts and materials as
much as possible. As the basic principle in realizing this plan, I will uphold the  just in time  approach. The
guiding rule is not to have goods shipped too early or too late. [ 1 ] 
 Kiichiro Toyoda, founder of Toyota Motor Company, 1938 
The most visible product of Toyota s quest for excellence is its manufacturing philosophy, called the Toyota
Production System (TPS). TPS is the next major evolution in efficient business processes after the mass production
system invented by Henry Ford, and it has been documented, analyzed, and exported to companies across industries
throughout the world. Outside of Toyota, TPS is often known as  lean  or  lean production,  since these were the
terms made popular in two best-selling books, The Machine That Changed the World (Womack, Jones, Roos,
1991) and Lean Thinking (Womack, Jones, 1996). The authors make it clear, however, that the foundation of their
research on lean is TPS and Toyota s development of it.
 
Although Toyota now has over 240,000 employees around the world, in many ways it is still a large  family business 
with considerable influence still exercised by the founding Toyoda family. In order to understand TPS and the Toyota
Way, and how the company became the world s best manufacturer, it is helpful to first understand the history and
personalities of the founding family members, who left an indelible mark on the Toyota culture. What is most
important about this is not the fact that one family has control, (Ford is similar in this respect), but the remarkable
consistency of leadership and philosophy throughout the history of Toyota. The roots of all of the Toyota Way
principles can be traced back to the very beginnings of the company. And the  DNA  of the Toyota Way is encoded
in each and every Toyota leader whether a Toyoda family member or not.
 
[ 1 ]From a speech given at the completion of the Toyota Koromo plant.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 31 ---
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 32 ---
The Toyoda Family: Generations of Consistent
Leadership
 
The story begins with Sakichi Toyoda, a tinkerer and inventor, not unlike Henry Ford, who grew up in the late 1800s
in a remote farming community outside of Nagoya. At that time, weaving was a major industry and the Japanese
government, wishing to promote the development of small businesses, encouraged the creation of cottage industries
spread across Japan. Small shops and mills employing a handful of people was the norm. Housewives made a little
spending money by working in these shops or at home. As a boy, Toyoda learned carpentry from his father and
eventually applied that skill to designing and building wooden spinning machines. In 1894 he began to make manual
looms that were cheaper but worked better than existing looms. 
Toyoda was pleased with his looms, but disturbed that his mother, grandmother, and their friends still had to work so
hard spinning and weaving. He wanted to find a way to relieve them of this punishing labor, so he set out to develop
power-driven wooden looms. 
This was an age when inventors had to do everything themselves. There were no large R&D departments to delegate
work to. When Toyoda first developed the power loom, there was no available power to run the loom, so he turned
his attention to the problem of generating power. Steam engines were the most common source of power, so he
bought a used steam engine and experimented with running the looms from this source. He figured out how to make
this work by trial and error and getting his hands dirty an approach that would become part of the foundation of the
Toyota Way, genchi genbutsu. In 1926, He started Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, the parent firm of the Toyota
Group and still a central player in the Toyota conglomerate (or keiretsu) today. 
Toyoda s endless tinkering and inventing eventually resulted in sophisticated automatic power looms that became  as
famous as Mikimoto pearls and Suzuki violins  (Toyoda, 1987). Among his inventions was a special mechanism to
automatically stop a loom whenever a thread broke an invention that evolved into a broader system that became one
of the two pillars of the Toyota Production System, called jidoka (automation with a human touch). Essentially,
jidoka means building in quality as you produce the material or  mistake proofing.  It also refers to designing
operations and equipment so your workers are not tied to machines and are free to perform value-added work. 
Throughout his life, Sakichi Toyoda was a great engineer and later referred to as Japan s  King of Inventors. 
However, his broader contribution to the development of Toyota was his philosophy and approach to his work,
based on a zeal for continuous improvement. Interestingly, this philosophy, and ultimately the Toyota Way, was
significantly influenced by his reading of a book first published in England in 1859 by Samuel Smiles entitled Self-Help
(Smiles, 2002). It preaches the virtues of industry, thrift, and self-improvement, illustrated with stories of great
inventors like James Watt, who helped develop the steam engine. The book so inspired Sakichi Toyoda that a copy
of it is on display under glass in a museum set up at his birth site. 
As I read Samuel Smiles  book, I could see how it influenced Toyoda. First of all, Smiles  inspiration for writing the
book was philanthropic. It grew out of his efforts to help young men in difficult economic circumstances who were
focused on improving themselves Smiles  goal was not to make money. Second, the book chronicles inventors whose
natural drive and inquisitiveness led to great inventions that changed the course of humanity. For example, Smiles
concludes that the success and impact of James Watt did not come from natural endowment but rather through hard
work, perseverance, and discipline. These are exactly the traits displayed by Sakichi Toyoda in making his power
looms work with steam engines. There are many examples throughout Smiles  book of  management by facts  and the
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 33 ---
importance of getting people to pay attention actively a hallmark of Toyota s approach to problem solving based on 
genchi genbutsu. 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 34 ---
The Toyota Automotive Company
 
His  mistake-proof  loom became Toyoda s most popular model, and in 1929 he sent his son, Kiichiro, to
England to negotiate the sale of the patent rights to Platt Brothers, the premier maker of spinning and
weaving equipment. His son negotiated a price of 100,000 English pounds, and in 1930 he used that capital
to start building the Toyota Motor Corporation (Fujimoto, 1999). 
It is perhaps ironic that the founder of Toyota Motor Company, Kiichiro Toyoda, was a frail and sickly boy, who
many felt did not have the physical capacity to become a leader. But his father disagreed and Kiichiro Toyoda
persevered. When Sakichi Toyoda tasked his son with building the car business, it was not to increase the family
fortune. He could just as well have handed over to him the family loom business. Sakichi Toyoda was undoubtedly
aware that the world was changing and power looms would become yesterday s technology while automobiles were
tomorrow s technology. But more than this, he had put his mark on the industrial world through loom making and
wanted his son to have his opportunity to contribute to the world. He explained to Kiichiro: 
Everyone should tackle some great project at least once in their life. I devoted most of my life to inventing
new kinds of looms. Now it is your turn. You should make an effort to complete something that will benefit
society. (Reingold, 1999) 
Kiichiro s father sent him to the prestigious Tokyo Imperial University to study mechanical engineering; he focused on
engine technology. He was able to draw on the wealth of knowledge within Toyoda Automatic Loom Works on
casting and machining metal parts. Despite his formal engineering education, he followed in his father s footsteps of
learning by doing. Shoichiro Toyoda, his son, described Kiichiro Toyoda as a  genuine engineer  who:
 
  gave genuine thought to an issue rather than rely on intuition. He always liked to accumulate facts. Before
he made the decision to make an automobile engine he made a small engine. The cylinder block was the most
difficult thing to cast, so he gained a lot of experience in that area and, based on the confidence he then had,
he went ahead. (Reingold, 1999) 
His approach to learning and creating mirrored that of his father. After World War II, Kiichiro Toyoda wrote,  I
would have grave reservations about our ability to rebuild Japan s industry if our engineers were the type who could
sit down to take their meals without ever having to wash their hands. 
He built Toyota Automotive Company on his father s philosophy and management approach, but added his own
innovations. For example, while Sakichi Toyoda was the father of what would become the jidoka pillar of the
Toyota Production System, Just-In-Time was Kiichiro Toyoda s contribution. His ideas were influenced by a study
trip to Ford s plants in Michigan to see the automobile industry as well as seeing the U.S. supermarket system of
replacing products on the shelves just in time as customers purchased them. As discussed in Chapter 11 , his vision
was at the root of the kanban system, which is modeled after the supermarket system. Notwithstanding these
achievements, it was his actions as a leader, like his father, that left the largest imprint on Toyota.
 
Along the way to building a car company World War II happened, Japan lost, and the American victors could have
halted car production. Kiichiro Toyoda was very concerned that the post-war occupation would shut down his
company. On the contrary, the Americans realized the need for trucks in order to rebuild Japan and even helped
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 35 ---
Toyota to start building trucks again. 
As the economy revitalized under the occupation, Toyota had little difficulty getting orders for automobiles, but
rampant inflation made money worthless and getting paid by customers was very difficult. Cash flow became so
horrendous that at one point in 1948 Toyota s debt was eight times its total capital value (Reingold, 1999). To avoid
bankruptcy, Toyota adopted strict cost-cutting policies, including voluntary pay cuts by managers and a 10 percent
cut in pay for all employees. This was part of a negotiation with employees in lieu of layoffs, to maintain Kiichiro
Toyoda s policy against firing employees. Finally, even the pay cuts were not enough. This forced him to ask for
1,600 workers to  retire  voluntarily. This led to work stoppages and public demonstrations by workers, which at the
time were becoming commonplace across Japan. 
Companies go out of business every day. The usual story we hear these days is of the CEO hanging on and fighting
to salvage his or her sweetheart option packages or perhaps selling off the company to be broken up for any valuable
assets. It is always some other person s fault that the company has failed. Kiichiro Toyoda took a different approach.
He accepted responsibility for the failing of the automobile company and resigned as president, even though in reality
the problems were well beyond his or anyone else s control. His personal sacrifice helped to quell worker
dissatisfaction. More workers voluntarily left the company and labor peace was restored. However, his tremendous
personal sacrifice had a more profound impact on the history of Toyota. Everyone in Toyota knew what he did and
why. The philosophy of Toyota to this day is to think beyond individual concerns to the long-term good of the
company, as well as to take responsibility for problems. Kiichiro Toyoda was leading by example in a way that is
unfathomable to most of us.
 
Toyoda family members grew up with similar philosophies. They all learned to get their hands dirty, learned the spirit
of innovation, and understood the values of the company in contributing to society. Moreover, they all had the vision
of creating a special company with a long-term future. After Kiichiro Toyoda, one of the Toyoda family leaders who
shaped the company was Eiji Toyoda, the nephew of Sakichi and younger cousin of Kiichiro. Eiji Toyoda also
studied mechanical engineering, entering Tokyo Imperial University in 1933. When he graduated, his cousin Kiichiro
gave him the assignment of setting up, all by himself, a research lab in a  car hotel  in Shibaura (Toyoda, 1987).
 
By  car hotel,  Kiichiro was referring to the equivalent of a large parking garage. These were jointly owned by Toyota
and other firms, and were necessary to encourage car ownership among the small number of wealthy individuals who
could afford cars. Eiji Toyoda started by cleaning a room in one corner of the building himself and getting some basic
furniture and drafting boards. He worked alone for a while and it took one year to finally build a group of about 10
people. His first task was to research machine tools, which he knew nothing about. He also checked defective cars,
as one role of the car hotel was to service Toyota products. In his spare time, he would check out companies that
could make auto parts for Toyota. He also had to find reliable parts suppliers in the Tokyo area in time for the
completion of a Toyota plant.
 
So Eiji Toyoda, like his cousin and uncle, grew up believing that the only way to get things done was to do it yourself
and get your hands dirty. When a challenge arose, the answer was to try things to learn by doing. With this system of
beliefs and values, it would be unimaginable to hand over the company to a son, cousin, or nephew who did not get
his hands dirty and truly love the automobile business. The company values shaped the development and selection of
each generation of leaders. 
Eventually Eiji Toyoda became the president and then chairman of Toyota Motor Manufacturing. He helped lead and
then presided over the company during its most vital years of growth after the war and through its growth into a
global powerhouse. Eiji Toyoda played a key role in selecting and empowering the leaders who shaped sales,
manufacturing, and product development, and, most importantly, the Toyota Production System.
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 36 ---
 
Now the Toyota Way has been spread beyond the leaders in Japan to Toyota associates around the world. But
since today s leaders did not go through the growing pains of starting a company from scratch, Toyota is always
thinking about how to teach and reinforce the value system that drove the company founders to get their hands dirty,
to truly innovate and think deeply about problems based on actual facts. This is the legacy of the Toyoda family. 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 37 ---
The Development of the Toyota Production System
(TPS)[2 ]
Toyota Motor Corporation struggled through the 1930s, primarily making simple trucks. In the early years, the
company produced poor-quality vehicles with primitive technology (e.g., hammering body panels over logs) and had
little success. In the 1930s, Toyota s leaders visited Ford and GM to study their assembly lines and carefully read
Henry Ford s book, Today and Tomorrow (1926). They tested the conveyor system, precision machine tools, and
the economies of scale idea in their loom production. Even before WWII, Toyota realized that the Japanese market
was too small and demand too fragmented to support the high production volumes in the U.S. (A U.S. auto line might
produce 9,000 units per month, while Toyota would produce only about 900 units per month, and Ford was about
10 times as productive.) Toyota managers knew that if they were to survive in the long run they would have to adapt
the mass production approach for the Japanese market. But how?
 
Now jump ahead to Toyota s situation after World War II, in 1950. It had a budding automotive business. The
country had been decimated by two atom bombs, most industries had been destroyed, the supply base was nil, and
consumers had little money. Imagine being the plant manager, Taiichi Ohno. Your boss, Eiji Toyoda, has returned
from another tour of U.S. plants, including the Ford s River Rouge complex, and he calls you into his office. He
calmly hands you a new assignment. (Don t all bosses come back from trips with assignments?) The assignment is to
improve Toyota s manufacturing process so that it equals the productivity of Ford. It makes you wonder what
Toyoda could have been thinking. Based on the mass production paradigm of the day, economies of scale alone
should have made this an impossible feat for tiny Toyota. This was David trying to take on Goliath. 
Ford s mass production system was designed to make huge quantities of a limited number of models. This is why all
Model T s were originally black. In contrast, Toyota needed to churn out low volumes of different models using the
same assembly line, because consumer demand in their auto market was too low to support dedicated assembly lines
for one vehicle. Ford had tons of cash and a large U.S. and international market. Toyota had no cash and operated in
a small country. With few resources and capital, Toyota needed to turn cash around quickly (from receiving the order
to getting paid). Ford had a complete supply system, Toyota did not. Toyota didn t have the luxury of taking cover
under high volume and economies of scale afforded by Ford s mass production system. It needed to adapt Ford s
manufacturing process to achieve simultaneously high quality, low cost, short lead times, and flexibility. 
[2 ]A succinct and informative discussion of the history of the Toyota Production System is provided in Takahiro
Fujimoto s book, The Evolution of a Manufacturing System at Toyota  (New York: Oxford University Press,
1999). Some of the facts in this section are based on that book.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 38 ---
One-Piece Flow, a Core Principle
When Eiji Toyoda and his managers took their 12-week study tour of U.S plants in 1950, they were expecting to be
dazzled by their manufacturing progress. Instead they were surprised that the development of mass production
techniques hadn t changed much since the 1930s. In fact, the production system had many inherent flaws. What they
saw was lots of equipment making large amounts of products that were stored in inventory, only to be later moved to
another department where big equipment processed the product, and so on to the next step. They saw how these
discrete process steps were based on large volumes, with interruptions between these steps causing large amounts of
material to sit in inventory and wait. They saw the high cost of the equipment and its so-called efficiency in reducing
the cost per piece, with workers keeping busy by keeping the equipment busy. They looked at traditional accounting
measures that rewarded managers who cranked out lots of parts and kept machines and workers busy, resulting in a
lot of overproduction and a very uneven flow, with defects hidden in these large batches that could go undiscovered
for weeks. Entire workplaces were disorganized and out of control. With big forklift trucks moving mountains of
materials everywhere, the factories often looked more like warehouses. To say the least, they were not impressed. In
fact, they saw an opportunity to catch up. 
Fortunately for Ohno, his assignment from Eiji Toyoda to  catch up with Ford s productivity  didn t mean competing
head-on with Ford. He just had to focus on improving Toyota s manufacturing within the protected Japanese market
a daunting assignment nonetheless. So Ohno did what any good manager would have done in his situation: he
benchmarked the competition through further visits to the U.S. He also studied Ford s book, Today and Tomorrow.
After all, one of the major components that Ohno believed Toyota needed to master was continuous flow and the
best example of that at the time was Ford s moving assembly line. Henry Ford had broken the tradition of craft
production by devising a new mass production paradigm to fill the needs of the early 20th century. A key enabler of
mass production s success was the development of precision machine tools and interchangeable parts (Womack,
Jones, Roos, 1991). Using principles from the scientific management movement pioneered by Frederick Taylor, Ford
also relied heavily on time studies, very specialized tasks for workers, and a separation between the planning done by
engineers and the work performed by workers. 
In his book Ford also preached the importance of creating continuous material flow throughout the manufacturing
process, standardizing processes, and eliminating waste. But while he preached it, his company didn t always practice
it. His company turned out millions of black Model T s and later Model A s using wasteful batch production methods
that built up huge banks of work-in-process inventory throughout the value chain, pushing product onto the next stage
of production (Womack, Jones, Roos, 1991). Toyota saw this as an inherent flaw in Ford s mass production system.
Toyota did not have the luxury of creating waste, it lacked warehouse and factory space and money, and it didn t
produce large volumes of just one type of vehicle. But it determined it could use Ford s original idea of continuous
material flow (as illustrated by the assembly line) to develop a system of one-piece flow that flexibly changed
according to customer demand and was efficient at the same time. Flexibility required marshaling the ingenuity of the
workers to continually improve processes.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Creating the Manufacturing System That
Changed the World
In the 1950s, Ohno returned to the place he understood best, the shop floor, and went to work to change the rules of
the game. He did not have a big consulting firm, Post-it® notes, or PowerPoint to reinvent his business processes.
He could not install an ERP system or use the Internet to make information move at the speed of light. But he was
armed with his shop-floor knowledge, dedicated engineers, managers, and workers who would give their all to help
the company succeed. With this he began his many  hands-on  journeys through Toyota s few factories, applying the
principles of jidoka and one-piece flow. Over years and then decades of practice, he had come up with the new
Toyota Production System.[3 ] Of course, Ohno and his team did not do this alone. 
Along with the lessons of Henry Ford, TPS borrowed many of its ideas from the U.S. One very important idea was
the concept of the  pull system,  which was inspired by American supermarkets. In any well-run supermarket,
individual items are replenished as each item begins to run low on the shelf. That is, material replenishment is initiated
by consumption. Applied to a shop floor, it means that Step 1 in a process shouldn t make (replenish) its parts until
the next process after it (Step 2) uses up its original supply of parts from Step 1 (that is down to a small amount of 
safety stock ). In TPS, when Step 2 is down to a small amount of safety stock, this triggers a signal to Step 1 asking
it for more parts. 
This is similar to what happens when you fill the gas tank in your car. As in  Step 2,  your car signals a need for more
fuel when the gauge tells you that fuel is low. Then you go to the gas station, Step 1, to refill. It would be foolish to fill
your gas tank when you re not low on gas, but the equivalent of this overproduction happens all the time in mass
production. At Toyota every step of every manufacturing process has the equivalent of a  gas gauge  built in, (called 
kanban), to signal to the previous step when its parts need to be replenished. This creates  pull  which continues
cascading backwards to the beginning of the manufacturing cycle. In contrast, most businesses use processes that are
filled with waste, because work in Step 1 is performed in large batches before it is needed by Step 2. This  work in
process  must then be stored and tracked and maintained until needed by step 2 a waste of many resources. Without
this pull system, just-in-time (JIT), one of the two pillars of TPS (the other is jidoka, built-in quality), would never
have evolved. 
JIT is a set of principles, tools, and techniques that allows a company to produce and deliver products in small
quantities, with short lead times, to meet specific customer needs. Simply put, JIT delivers the right items at the right
time in the right amounts. The power of JIT is that it allows you to be responsive to the day-by-day shifts in customer
demand, which was exactly what Toyota needed all along.
 
Toyota also took to heart the teachings of the American quality pioneer, W. Edwards Deming. He gave U.S. quality
and productivity seminars in Japan and taught that, in a typical business system, meeting and exceeding the customers
requirements is the task of everyone within an organization. And he dramatically broadened the definition of 
customer  to include both internal and external customers. Each person or step in a production line or business
process was to be treated as a  customer  and to be supplied with exactly what was needed, at the exact time
needed. This was the origin of Deming s principle,  the next process is the customer.  The Japanese phrase for this, 
atokotei wa o-kyakusama,  became one of the most significant expressions in JIT, because in a pull system it means
the preceding process must always do what the subsequent process says. Otherwise JIT won t work. 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 40 ---
Deming also encouraged the Japanese to adopt a systematic approach to problem solving, which later became
known as the Deming Cycle or Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) Cycle, a cornerstone of continuous improvement. The
Japanese term for continuous improvement is kaizen and is the process of making incremental improvements, no
matter how small, and achieving the lean goal of eliminating all waste that adds cost without adding to value.[4 ]
Kaizen teaches individuals skills for working effectively in small groups, solving problems, documenting and
improving processes, collecting and analyzing data, and self-managing within a peer group. It pushes the decision
making (or proposal making) down to the workers and requires open discussion and a group consensus before
implementing any decisions. Kaizen is a total philosophy that strives for perfection and sustains TPS on a daily basis. 
When Ohno and his team emerged from the shop floor with a new manufacturing system, it wasn t just for one
company in a particular market and culture. What they had created was a new paradigm in manufacturing or service
delivery a new way of seeing, understanding, and interpreting what is happening in a production process, that could
propel them beyond the mass production system. 
By the 1960s, TPS was a powerful philosophy that all types of businesses and processes could learn to use, but this
would take a while. Toyota did take the first steps to spread  lean  by diligently teaching the principles of TPS to their
key suppliers. This moved its isolated lean manufacturing plants toward a total lean extended enterprise when
everyone in the supply chain is practicing the same TPS principles. A powerful business model indeed! Still, the
power of TPS was mostly unknown outside of Toyota and its affiliated suppliers until the first oil shock of 1973 that
sent the world into a global recession, with Japan among the hardest hit. Japanese industry went into a tailspin and the
name of the game was survival. But the Japanese government began to notice when Toyota went into the red for less
time than other companies and came back to profitability faster. The Japanese government took the initiative to
launch seminars on TPS, even though it understood only a fraction of what made Toyota tick. 
In the early  80s when I visited Japan, it was my experience that as you moved out of Toyota City and Toyota s
group of affiliates to other Japanese companies, the application of TPS principles quickly became watered down and
weakened. It would still be a while before the world would understand the Toyota Way and the new paradigm of
manufacturing.
 
Part of the problem was that mass production after World War II focused on cost, cost, cost.  Make bigger
machines and through economies of scale drive down cost.   Automate to replace people if it can be cost justified. 
This kind of thinking ruled the manufacturing world until the 1980s. Then the business world got the quality religion
from Deming, Joseph Juran, Kaoru Ishikawa, and other quality gurus. It learned that focusing on quality actually
reduced cost more than focusing only on cost. Finally, in the 1990s, through the work of MIT s Auto Industry
Program and the bestseller based on its research, The Machine That Changed the World (Womack, Jones, Roos,
1991), the world manufacturing community discovered  lean production  the authors  term for what Toyota had
learned decades earlier through focusing on speed in the supply chain: shortening lead time by eliminating waste
in each step of a process leads to best quality and lowest cost, while improving safety and morale. 
[3 ]Still one of the best and surprisingly readable overviews of the Toyota Production System is Taiichi Ohno s own
book, Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Production (Portland, OR: Productivity Press, 1988).
Ohno gives a very personalized account of the system in a story fashion.
 
[4 ]Actually kaizen means  change for the better  and can refer to very large changes or small, incremental changes.
Because Western firms tend to focus on breakthrough innovation and are weak at continuously improving in small
amounts, this has been the focus of teaching kaizen to Western firms. Sometimes kaikaiku is used to refer to major,
revolutionary changes.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 41 ---
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 42 ---
Conclusion
 
Toyota started with the values and ideals of the Toyoda family. To understand the Toyota Way, we must start with
the Toyoda family. They were innovators, they were pragmatic idealists, they learned by doing, and they always
believed in the mission of contributing to society. They were relentless in achieving their goals. Most importantly, they
were leaders who led by example.
 
TPS evolved to meet the particular challenges Toyota faced as it grew as a company. It evolved as Taiichi Ohno and
his contemporaries put these principles to work on the shop floor through years of trial and error. When we take a
snapshot of this at a point in time, we can describe the technical features and accomplishments of TPS. But the way
that Toyota developed TPS and the challenges it faced and the approach it took to solving these problems is really a
reflection of the Toyota Way. Toyota s own internal Toyota Way document talks about the  spirit of challenge  and
the acceptance of responsibility to meet that challenge. The document states:
 
We accept challenges with a creative spirit and the courage to realize our own dreams without losing drive or
energy. We approach our work vigorously, with optimism and a sincere belief in the value of our contribution.
 
And further:
 
We strive to decide our own fate. We act with self-reliance, trusting in our own abilities. We accept
responsibility for our conduct and for maintaining and improving the skills that enable us to produce added
value. 
These powerful words describe well what Ohno and the team accomplished. Out of the rubble of WWII they
accepted a seemingly impossible challenge match Ford s productivity. Ohno accepted the challenge and,  with a
creative spirit and courage,  solved problem after problem and evolved a new production system. He and the team
did it themselves and did not look to be bailed out by the Japanese government or any third party. This same process
has been played out time and time again throughout the history of Toyota. 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 43 ---
Chapter 3: The Heart of the
Toyota Production System:
Eliminating Waste
 
Overview
 
Many good American companies have respect for individuals, and practice kaizen and other TPS tools. But
what is important is having all the elements together as a system. It must be practiced every day in a very
consistent manner not in spurts in a concrete way on the shop floor. 
 Fujio Cho, President, Toyota Motor Corporation 
We touched on the philosophy of eliminating waste, or muda, as they say in Japan, in Chapter 2 , with Ohno s
journey through the shop floor. He spent a great deal of time there, learning to map the activities that added value to
the product and getting rid of non-value-adding activity. It s important to take a closer look at this, because many of
the tools of TPS and principles of the Toyota Way derive from this focused behavior. 
I want to be clear that the Toyota Production System is not the Toyota Way. TPS is the most systematic and highly
developed example of what the principles of the Toyota Way can accomplish. The Toyota Way consists of the
foundational principles of the Toyota culture, which allow TPS to function so effectively. Though they are different,
the development of TPS and its stunning success are intimately connected with the evolution and development of the
Toyota Way.
 
When applying TPS, you start with examining the manufacturing process from the customer s perspective. The first
question in TPS is always  What does the customer want from this process?  (Both the internal customer at the
next steps in the production line and the final, external customer.) This defines value. Through the customer s eyes,
you can observe a process and separate the value-added steps from the non-value-added steps. You can apply this
to any process manufacturing, information, or service. 
Take the example of a manual assembly operation on a truck chassis assembly line (see Figure 3-1 ). The operator
takes many individual steps, but generally only a small number of the steps add value to the product, as far as the
customer is concerned. In this case, only the three steps identified add value. Some of the non-value-added steps are
necessary; for example, the operator has to reach to get the power tool. The point is to minimize the time spent on
non-value-added operations by positioning the tools and material as close as possible to the point of assembly. 
Toyota has identified seven major types of non-value-adding waste in business or manufacturing processes, which
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 44 ---
are described below. You can apply these to product development, order taking, and the office, not just a
production line. There is an eighth waste, which I have included.
 
1.
Overproduction. Producing items for which there are no orders, which generates such wastes as overstaffing
and storage and transportation costs because of excess inventory. 
2.
Waiting (time on hand). Workers merely serving to watch an automated machine or having to stand around
waiting for the next processing step, tool, supply, part, etc., or just plain having no work because of
stockouts, lot processing delays, equipment downtime, and capacity bottlenecks.
 
3.
Unnecessary transport or conveyance. Carrying work in process (WIP) long distances, creating inefficient
transport, or moving materials, parts, or finished goods into or out of storage or between processes.
 
Figure 3-1: Waste in a truck chassis assembly line 
4.
Overprocessing or incorrect processing. Taking unneeded steps to process the parts. Inefficiently
processing due to poor tool and product design, causing unnecessary motion and producing defects. Waste
is generated when providing higher-quality products than is necessary. 
5.
Excess inventory. Excess raw material, WIP, or finished goods causing longer lead times, obsolescence,
damaged goods, transportation and storage costs, and delay. Also, extra inventory hides problems such as
production imbalances, late deliveries from suppliers, defects, equipment downtime, and long setup times.
 
6.
Unnecessary movement. Any wasted motion employees have to perform during the course of their work,
such as looking for, reaching for, or stacking parts, tools, etc. Also, walking is waste.
 
7.
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 45 ---
Defects. Production of defective parts or correction. Repair or rework, scrap, replacement production, and
inspection mean wasteful handling, time, and effort.
 
8.
Unused employee creativity. Losing time, ideas, skills, improvements, and learning opportunities by not
engaging or listening to your employees. 
Ohno considered the fundamental waste to be overproduction, since it causes most of the other wastes. Producing
more than the customer wants by any operation in the manufacturing process necessarily leads to a build-up of
inventory somewhere downstream: the material is just sitting around waiting to be processed in the next operation.
Mass or larger-batch manufacturers might ask,  What s the problem with this, as long as people and equipment are
producing parts?  The problem is that big buffers (inventory between processes) lead to other suboptimal behavior,
like reducing your motivation to continuously improve your operations. Why worry about preventive maintenance on
equipment when shutdowns do not immediately affect final assembly anyway? Why get overly concerned about a few
quality errors when you can just toss out defective parts? Because by the time a defective piece works its way to the
later operation where an operator tries to assemble that piece, there may be weeks of bad parts in process and sitting
in buffers.[1 ] 
Figure 3-2  shows this waste through a simple time line for the process of casting, machining, and assembling. As in
most traditionally managed operations, most of the time spent on material is actually wasted. Anyone who has been
through a lean manufacturing or TPS seminar will recognize this figure, so I will not belabor the point. From a lean
perspective, the first thing you should do in approaching any process is to map the value stream following the
circuitous path of material (or paper or information) through your process. It is best to walk the actual path to get the
full experience. You can draw this path on a layout and calculate the time and distance traveled and then give it the
highly technical name of  spaghetti diagram.  Even people who have worked inside a factory for most of their adult
lives will be amazed at the results of this exercise. The point of Figure 3-2  is that we have taken very simple
transformation processes and stretched them to the point that the value added is barely recognizable. 
I discovered an astonishing example of this while consulting for a manufacturer of steel nuts. The engineers and
managers in my seminar assured me that their process could not benefit from lean manufacturing because it was so
simple. Rolls of steel coil came in and were cut, tapped, heat-treated, and put into boxes. Material flew through the
automated machines at the rate of hundreds of nuts a minute. When we followed the value (and non-value) stream,
their claim became comical. We started at the receiving dock, and every time I thought the process must be finished,
we walked across the factory one more time to another step. The nuts at some point left the factory for a few weeks
to be heat-treated, because management had calculated that contracting out heat-treating was more economical.
When all was said and done, the nut-making process that took seconds for most operations, with the exception of
heat-treating, which could take a few hours, typically took weeks and sometimes months. We calculated percent
value added for different product lines and got numbers ranging from .008 percent to 2 or 3 percent. Eyes opened!
To make matters worse, equipment downtime was a common problem, idling machines and allowing for large
buildups of material around them. Some clever manager had figured out that contracting outside skill trades was
cheaper than hiring full-time people. So there was often nobody around to fix a machine when it went down, let alone
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 46 ---
do a good job on preventive maintenance. 
Figure 3-2: Waste in a value system 
Local efficiencies were emphasized at the cost of slowing down the value stream by creating large amounts of
in-process and finished-goods inventory and taking a long time to identify problems (defects) that reduced quality. As
a result, the plant was not flexible to changes in customer demand.
 
[1 ]The concept of value-added and non-value-added work is eloquently explained by James P. Womack and Daniel
T. Jones in Lean Thinking (1996). They introduce the value stream perspective that is the essence of lean thinking,
based on the Toyota Production System.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 47 ---
Traditional Process Improvement vs. Lean
Improvement
The traditional approach to process improvement focuses on identifying local efficiencies  Go to the equipment, the
value-added processes, and improve uptime, or make it cycle faster, or replace the person with automated
equipment.  The result might be a significant percent improvement for that individual process, but have little impact on
the overall value stream. This is especially true because in most processes there are relatively few value-added steps,
so improving those value-added steps will not amount to much. Without lean thinking, most people can t see the huge
opportunities for reducing waste by getting rid of or shrinking non-value-added steps.
 
In a lean improvement initiative, most of the progress comes because a large number of non-value-added steps are
squeezed out. In the process, the value-added time is also reduced. We can see this most vividly by taking a process
like the nut-making example and creating a one-piece-flow cell. 
In lean manufacturing, a cell consists of a close arrangement of the people, machines, or workstations in a processing
sequence. You create cells to facilitate one-piece flow of a product or service, through various operations, for
example, welding, assembly, packing, one unit at a time, at a rate determined by the needs of the customer and with
the least amount of delay and waiting. 
Take the case of the nut. If you line up the processes needed to create it in a cell and then pass the nut or very small
lots of nuts from one operation to another in a one-piece flow, what once took weeks to complete can now be done
in hours. And this case is not unusual. The magic of making huge gains in productivity and quality and big reductions
in inventory, space, and lead time through one-piece flow has been demonstrated over and over in companies
throughout the world. It always seems miraculous and the results are always the same. This is why the
one-piece-flow cell is the ultimate in lean production. It has eliminated most of Toyota s eight kinds of waste. 
In fact, the ultimate goal of lean manufacturing is to apply the ideal of one-piece flow to all business operations, from
product design to launch, order taking, and physical production. Anyone I know who has experienced the power of
lean thinking becomes a zealot and wants to rid the world of waste, applying it to every process, from administrative
to engineering. But I caution that, as with every other tool or process, the answer is not to blindly apply it by putting
cells everywhere. 
For example, the nut plant had created a cell for cutting and tapping. Unfortunately, they also bought very expensive
and complex computerized equipment. The equipment was broken a lot of the time, creating delays. And the nuts still
had to leave the cell for heat-treating taking weeks before they came back. Inventory still piled up. The  lean cell 
became a joke to the shop-floor workers who could see the waste a serious setback to the lean improvement
process.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 48 ---
The  TPS House  Diagram: A System Based on a
Structure, Not Just a Set of Techniques
For decades Toyota was doing just fine in applying and improving TPS on the shop floor day in and day out without
documenting TPS theory. Workers and managers were constantly learning new methods and variations on old
methods through actual practice on the shop floor. Communication was strong in what was a relatively small
company, so  best practices  developed within Toyota spread to other Toyota plants and ultimately to suppliers. But
as the practices matured within Toyota, it became clear that the task of teaching TPS to the supply base was never
ending. So Taiichi Ohno disciple Fujio Cho developed a simple representation a house.
 
The  TPS house  diagram (see Figure 3-3 ) has become one of the most recognizable symbols in modern
manufacturing. Why a house? Because a house is a structural system. The house is strong only if the roof, the pillars,
and the foundation are strong. A weak link weakens the whole system. There are different versions of the house, but
the core principles remain the same. It starts with the goals of best quality, lowest cost, and shortest lead time the
roof. There are then two outer pillars just-in-time, probably the most visible and highly publicized characteristic of
TPS, and jidoka, which in essence means never letting a defect pass into the next station and freeing people from
machines automation with a human touch. In the center of the system are people. Finally there are various
foundational elements, which include the need for standardized, stable, reliable processes, and also heijunka, which
means leveling out the production schedule in both volume and variety. A leveled schedule or heijunka is necessary
to keep the system stable and to allow for minimum inventory. Big spikes in the production of certain products to the
exclusion of others will create part shortages unless lots of inventory are added into the system. 
Each element of the house by itself is critical, but more important is the way the elements reinforce each other. JIT
means removing, as much as possible, the inventory used to buffer operations against problems that may arise in
production. The ideal of one-piece flow is to make one unit at a time at the rate of customer demand or takt (German
word for meter). Using smaller buffers (removing the  safety net ) means that problems like quality defects become
immediately visible. This reinforces jidoka, which halts the production process. This means workers must resolve the
problems immediately and urgently to resume production. At the foundation of the house is stability. Ironically, the
requirement for working with little inventory and stopping production when there is a problem causes instability and a
sense of urgency among workers. In mass production, when a machine goes down, there is no sense of urgency: the
maintenance department is scheduled to fix it while inventory keeps the operations running. By contrast, in lean
production, when an operator shuts down equipment to fix a problem, other operations will soon stop producing,
creating a crisis. So there is always a sense of urgency for everyone in production to fix problems together to get the
equipment up and running. If the same problem happens repeatedly, management will quickly conclude that this is a
critical situation and it may be time to invest in Total Productive Maintenance (TPM), where everyone learns how to
clean, inspect, and maintain equipment. A high degree of stability is needed so that the system is not constantly
stopped. People are at the center of the house because only through continuous improvement can the operation ever
attain this needed stability. People must be trained to see waste and solve problems at the root cause by repeatedly
asking why the problem really occurs. Problem solving is at the actual place to see what is really going on (genchi
genbutsu).
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 49 ---
 
Figure 3-3: The Toyota Production System 
In some versions of the  house  model, several of the Toyota Way philosophies are added into the foundation, such
as  respect for humanity.  While Toyota often presents this house with the goals of cost, quality, and timely delivery,
in actuality their plants follow a common practice in Japan of focusing on QCDSM (quality, cost, delivery, safety, and
morale) or some variation. Toyota will never sacrifice the safety of their workers for production. And they do not
need to, as eliminating waste does not imply creating stressful, unsafe work practices. As Ohno wrote:[2 ] 
Every method available for man-hour reduction to reduce cost must, of course, be pursued vigorously; but
we must never forget that safety is the foundation of all our activities. There are times when improvement
activities do not proceed in the name of safety. In such instances, return to the starting point and take
another look at the purpose of that operation. Never be satisfied with inaction. Question and redefine your
purpose to attain progress. 
[2 ]From the unpublished, internal Toyota document,  High Quality with Safety: Kanban and Just-in-Time,  by Taiichi
Ohno.
 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
--- PAGE 50 ---
Conclusion
TPS is not a toolkit. It is not just a set of lean tools like just-in-time, cells, 5S (sort, stabilize, shine, standardize,
sustain, discussed in Chapter 13 ), kanban, etc. It is a sophisticated system of production in which all of the parts
contribute to a whole. The whole at its roots focuses on supporting and encouraging people to continually improve
the processes they work on. Unfortunately, many books about lean manufacturing reinforce the misunderstanding that
TPS is a collection of tools that lead to more efficient operations. The purpose of these tools is lost and the centrality
of people is missed. When looked at more broadly, TPS is about applying the principles of the Toyota Way. The
initial focus was on the shop floor, but the principles are broad and, in fact, apply just as well to engineering and
business service operations as well.
 
In the next chapter , we will review the 14 principles of the Toyota Way, which are the basis of the culture behind
TPS and the focus of this book. In Chapters 5  and 6  we will see the 14 principles in action with the story of the
challenges Toyota overcame to develop the Lexus and the Prius. 
This document is created with the unregistered version of Document2PDF Pilot.
