The  
Box

The  
Box
How tHe SHipping Container  
Made tHe world SMaller  
and tHe  
world eConoMy Bigger
Second Edition
Marc Levinson
prinCeton UniverSity preSS
prinCeton and oxford
Copyright © 2016 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street,
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
3 Market Place, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TR
press.princeton.edu
Jacket art courtesy of Shutterstock
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Levinson, Marc.
The box : how the shipping container made the world smaller and  
the world economy bigger / Marc Levinson. — Second Edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-17081-7 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Containerization—History. 
2. McLean, Malcolm Purcell, 1913–2001. I. Title.
TA1215.L47 2016
387.5ʹ442—dc23
2015024925
British Library Cataloging- in- Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Sabon LT Std text  
with Scala Sans OT Display
Printed on acid- free paper. ∞
press.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
To Aaron, Rebecca, and Deborah

Contents
Preface ix
Acknowledgments to the Second Edition xvii
Chapter 1 The World the Box Made 1
Chapter 2 Gridlock on the Docks 21
Chapter 3 The Trucker 47
Chapter 4 The System 72
Chapter 5 The Battle for New York’s Port 102
Chapter 6 Union Disunion 135
Chapter 7 Setting the Standard 170
Chapter 8 Takeoff 202
Chapter 9 Vietnam 230
Chapter 10 Ports in a Storm 254
Chapter 11 Boom and Bust 285
Chapter 12 The Bigness Complex 310
Chapter 13 The Shippers’ Revenge 329
Chapter 14 Just in Time 355
Chapter 15 Adding Value 375
Notes 391
Bibliography 465
Index 491

Preface
Writing a book is usually a solitary venture, but The 
Box was a more private project than most. This was not 
entirely my choice. Early on in my work, when acquain-
tances would ask what I’d been doing, I would proudly 
tell them I was writing a history of the shipping con -
tainer. The result of this disclosure was invariably 
stunned silence, as my interlocutors tried to think of  
something to say about a boring metal box. Eventually, 
I stopped talking about the book altogether, simply to 
avoid the embarrassment that every mention of the topic 
would bring.
The response to the book’s publication in the spring 
of 2006, then, caught me by surprise. I knew that the 
history of containerization would show itself to be a far 
more absorbing topic than readers imagined, and I fig-
ured that economists and logistics specialists might be 
intrigued by my argument that tumbling transport costs 
were critical in opening the way to what we now call 
globalization. I had not the slightest clue, however, that 
the container was on its way to becoming something 
trendy. Then the invitations began to arrive. In New 
York, I shared a platform with architects using contain-
ers to design office buildings and apartments. In Genoa, 
I spoke alongside an entrepreneur who turned contain-
ers into temporary art galleries, while in Santa Barbara, 
x • Preface
California, the local museum joined forces with a uni -
versity to promote a series of public events on ramifica-
tions of the container that I had never considered. The 
ugliness of stacks of abandoned containers; the security 
threat posed by millions of boxes with undetermined 
contents; the environmental damage caused by massive 
movement of cargo: all of these issues came to the fore 
in reviews and critical articles.
Then business executives weighed in. A leading com-
puter manufacturer embraced the box as a metaphor for 
modular products, announcing a “data center in a box.” 
A major oil company drew insights from the container 
that helped it cut the cost of exploration in the Cana -
dian Arctic. Several consulting firms applied lessons 
from containerization to a variety of business problems 
having nothing to do with freight transportation. A soft-
ware house developed the notion of a computer system 
that passed “containerized” pieces of data from one lo-
cation to the next, an extension of containerization well 
beyond any I had imagined.
Academics drew on The Box to open some new lines 
of intellectual inquiry. Prior to the book’s publication, as 
I discovered in the course of my research, there had been 
very little serious study of the container and its conse -
quences, except in the area of labor relations. That ne-
glect was partly due to lack of data: chapter 13 lays out 
the obstacles to developing reliable estimates of how the 
container has changed transport costs since the 1950s. 
The reluctance of academics to cross traditional bound-
aries also inhibited exploration of the container’s im -
pact. One expert on logistics, for example, was quite 
familiar with containerships but told me he had never 
Preface • xi
considered the container’s impact on shore. Mainly, 
however, I think academics ignored the container for so 
long because it seemed so prosaic. A noted economic 
historian, a reader informed me, had long proclaimed to 
students that while the container was an important de-
velopment, it was too simple to be worth much study. 
The book may at least have knocked down that last ob-
jection. It seems to have provided fodder for a variety of 
conferences and symposia, stimulating a new intellec -
tual dialogue about the role of transportation in eco -
nomic change.
The media have undertaken a similar reconsideration. 
Since the late 1980s, commentators have filled columns 
and airwaves with glib chatter about globalization, as if 
it were merely a matter of bits and bytes and corporate 
cost- cutting. Since The Box appeared, however, many 
news stories and articles have acknowledged that, digital 
communication notwithstanding, the integration of the 
world economy depends less on call centers and trans- 
Pacific exports of technical services than on the ability to 
move goods cheaply from here to there. The Box, I hope, 
has contributed to public understanding that inadequate 
port, road, and rail infrastructure can cause economic 
harm by raising the cost of moving freight.
Many aspects of the response to The Box were star -
tling, but perhaps the most unexpected concerns a 
widespread stereotype about innovation. In his later 
years, Malcom McLean, the former trucker whose au-
dacious scheme to create the first containership line is 
recounted in chapter 3, was frequently asked how he 
came up with the idea of the container. He responded 
with a tale about how, after spending hours in late 1937 
xii • Preface
queuing at a Jersey City pier to unload his truck, he re-
alized that it would be quicker simply to hoist the entire 
truck body on board. From this incident, we are meant 
to believe, came his decision eighteen years later to buy 
a war- surplus tanker and equip it to carry 33- foot- long 
containers.
The story of this “Aha!” moment does not appear in 
The Box, because I believe the event never occurred. 
There is certainly no contemporaneous evidence for it. I 
suspect that the story of McLean’s stroke of genius took 
on a life of its own as, decades later, well- meaning peo-
ple asked McLean where the container came from. As I 
show in chapter 2, ship lines and railroads had been ex-
perimenting with containers for a half century before 
Malcom McLean’s trip to Jersey City, and containers 
were already in wide use in North America and Europe 
when McLean’s first ship set sail in 1956.
Malcom McLean’s real contribution to the develop -
ment of containerization, in my view, had to do not with 
a metal box or a ship, but with a managerial insight. 
McLean understood that transport companies’ true 
business was moving freight rather than operating ships 
or trains. That understanding helped his version of con-
tainerization succeed where so many others had failed. 
To my consternation, though, I quickly learned that 
many people quite fancy the tale of McLean’s dockside 
epiphany. The idea of a single moment of inspiration, of 
the apple landing on young Isaac Newton’s head, stirs 
the soul, even if it turns out to be apocryphal. In con -
trast, the idea that innovation occurs in fits and starts, 
with one person adapting a concept already in use and 
another figuring out how to make a profit from it, has 
Preface • xiii
little appeal. The world likes heroes, even if the worship-
ful story of one person’s heroic effort is rarely an accu-
rate representation of the complex path of technological 
advance.
How innovation really works is certainly one of the 
lessons of The Box, but for me there is another that 
looms even larger: the role of unintended consequences. 
Economists, myself included, are in the business of pre-
dicting events; we like to think that we can analyze 
what has happened and gain insight into what will 
occur in the days to come. Business school students take 
a similar approach, learning to apply quantitative anal-
ysis to historical data in order to draw conclusions 
about the future. In the business world, this way of 
looking at the world through a spreadsheet is treated as 
modern management thinking. It’s the bread and butter 
of some of the world’s most famous, and expensive, 
consulting firms.
The story of containerization attests to the limits of 
this sort of rational analysis, for the developments re -
counted in The Box turned out not at all as expected. 
Containerization, after all, began as a means of shaving 
a few dollars off the cost of sending Malcom McLean’s 
trucks between New York and North Carolina. At best, 
it was regarded as a minor innovation, “an expedient,” 
as one leading naval architect opined in 1958. Perhaps, 
the experts thought, containers might capture a small 
share of America’s declining coastal shipping business. 
They were deemed impractical for most types of cargo 
and for shipments to distant places, such as Asia.
Absolutely no one anticipated that containerization 
would open the way to vast changes in where and how 
xiv • Preface
goods are manufactured, that it would provide a major 
impetus to transport deregulation, or that it would help 
integrate East Asia into a world economy that previ -
ously had centered on the North Atlantic. That contain-
erization would eliminate the jobs of dockworkers was 
clear from the start, but no one imagined that it would 
cause massive job loss among workers in manufacturing 
and wholesaling whose employment had long been tied 
to the presence of nearby docks. Political leaders, trade 
unionists, and corporate executives made costly mis -
takes because they failed to apprehend the container’s 
influence. U.S. railroads fought containerization tooth 
and nail in the 1960s and 1970s, convinced that it would 
destroy their traditional boxcar business, never imagin-
ing that in the second decade of the twenty- first century 
they would be carrying fourteen million containers every 
year. Many shipping magnates—including, eventually, 
McLean himself—led their ship lines to failure by mis-
judging how the container business would develop. And 
certainly, no one in the early days of container shipping 
foresaw that this American- born industry would come 
to be dominated by European and Asian firms, as the 
U.S.- flag ship lines, burdened by a legacy of protected 
markets and heavy regulation, proved unable to com -
pete in a fast- changing world.
And, of course, no one involved with the container’s 
development imagined that metal boxes would come to 
be regarded as a major security threat. Improved secu -
rity, ironically, was originally one of the container’s big 
selling points: cargo packed inside a locked container 
was far less susceptible to theft and damage than cargo 
handled loose. Ship lines and border- control officials 
Preface • xv
were taken by surprise in the 1980s, when smugglers 
figured out that the relative secrecy, anonymity, and reli-
ability of container shipping made it ideal for transport-
ing drugs and undocumented migrants as well. In those 
days, enclosing container yards with fences and locked 
gates was thought adequate to solve the problem.
Two decades later, evaluating potential threats after a 
series of devastating attacks, antiterrorism experts hit 
upon the possibility that terrorists might cripple world 
trade by exploding radioactive weapons secreted in 
containers. The seriousness of that threat was impossi-
ble to evaluate, although experience has made clear that 
terrorists bent on wreaking large- scale devastation can 
do so with readily available materials—ammonium ni-
trate fertilizer, propane, explosives embedded with 
nails—without going to the trouble of building a “dirty 
bomb.” Nonetheless, containers suddenly came into 
public consciousness as an urgent threat, one that no 
government anywhere was equipped to confront. A 
large- scale spending program inevitably followed, with 
radiation detectors appearing at port gates and port 
workers mandated to wear supposedly tamper- proof 
identity cards. Whether these efforts have improved se-
curity remains unclear; tests using satellites to track 
container shipments from origin to destination have 
not been promising. The frenetic attempt to bolster se-
curity at the ports, however, may have created a risk 
that may be even more difficult to address: the risk that 
precipitous government orders to detain vessels or close 
ports in the face of a real or imagined terrorist action 
could cause grave damage to economies all around the 
world.
xvi • Preface
The history of the shipping container is humbling. 
Careful planning and thorough analysis have their place, 
but they provide little guidance in the face of abrupt 
changes that alter an industry’s very fundamentals. Flex-
ibility is a virtue in such a situation. Resistance can be a 
vice, but so can a rush to action. In this kind of situa -
tion, “expect the unexpected” may be as good a motto 
as any.
Just as no one in the container’s early years imagined 
a ship that could carry the freight moved by ten thou -
sand trucks or dreamed that the world’s ports would 
soon be handling the arrival of two million 40- foot con-
tainers every week, so, too, did no one conceive that 
steel shipping containers could be turned into houses 
and sculptures or that abandoned containers would be-
come a serious nuisance. That simple metal box was 
what we today label a disruptive technology. Even now, 
six decades after it came into use, it continues to affect 
our world in unexpected ways.
August 2015
Acknowledgments to the Second Edition
Container shipping is not ancient history, but much 
relatively recent source material proved surprisingly dif-
ficult to locate. Many relevant corporate records have 
been destroyed. The early growth of containerization 
was nurtured by the Port of New York Authority (now 
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey), but 
many of that agency’s records were destroyed in the ter-
rorist attacks on the World Trade Center on September 
11, 2001. That this book came to be is a tribute to the 
many dedicated archivists and librarians who helped me 
identify extant materials in collections that researchers 
rarely look at, as well as to private individuals who 
combed through their own files for important records.
Back in the early 1990s, when I first thought of writ-
ing about Malcom McLean, George Stevenson of the 
North Carolina State Archives came up with hard- to- 
find material about the McLean family. When I decided 
to revisit containerization more recently, Kenneth Cobb 
of the New York Municipal Archives, Doug DiCarlo of 
the LaGuardia and Wagner Archives at LaGuardia Com-
munity College in New York, and Bette M. Epstein of 
the New Jersey State Archives in Trenton helped me 
piece together the story of how the container decimated 
New York City’s port.
xviii • Acknowledgments
The lack of historical material on the International 
Longshoremen’s Association (ILA) is a serious impedi -
ment to historical work on longshore labor relations. 
Gail Malmgreen of the Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives 
at New York University helped me locate documents 
and oral histories in that remarkable collection. Patrizia 
Sione and Melissa Holland of the Kheel Center, Cather-
wood Library, at the Cornell University School of Indus-
trial and Labor Relations, guided me through the papers 
of Vernon Jensen, which contain a wealth of detail on 
the ILA.
Military history is not my field, but my efforts to 
learn about the role of container shipping in the Viet -
nam War benefited from much expert guidance. Gina 
Akers and Wade Wyckoff of the Operational Archives 
Branch of the Naval Historical Center, in Washington, 
helped me with the records of the Military Sea Trans -
portation Service and with the U.S. Navy’s extensive 
collection of oral histories. Jeannine Swift and Rich 
Boylan, of the Modern Military Records division of the 
National Archives in College Park, Maryland, went to 
great lengths to locate little- used material on Vietnam- 
era logistics. William Moye, of the U.S. Army Materiel 
Command Historical Office at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, 
furnished important information on General Frank S. 
Besson Jr., who persuaded the U.S. armed forces to em-
brace containerization.
Roger Horowitz and Christopher T. Baer, of the 
Hagley Museum and Library in Wilmington, Delaware, 
suggested files I would never have thought to investigate 
in the archives of the Penn Central railroad. Beth Posner 
of the City University of New York Graduate Center lo-
Acknowledgments • xix
cated much obscure material for me. I also drew on re-
sources from the Bancroft Library of the University of 
California at Berkeley, the Library of Congress, the Cor-
nell University library system, the New York Public Li-
brary, and the Seattle Public Library, and I wish to re -
cord my appreciation for their assistance.
The oral histories prepared for the Smithsonian by 
Arthur Donovan, professor emeritus at the U.S. Mer -
chant Marine Academy, and the late Andrew Gibson are 
an important source for any researcher on this subject, 
and Professor Donovan also pointed me to records on 
container standards. Marilyn Sandifur, Midori Tabata, 
Jerome Battle, and Mike Beritzhoff of the Port of Oak-
land were kind enough to guide me around the port and 
bring my knowledge of terminal management up to 
date. I owe a particular debt to Jim Doig, who allowed 
me to use material (now in the New Jersey State Ar -
chives) that he compiled in preparing his masterful book 
on the Port of New York Authority, and to Les Har -
lander, whose files on the negotiation of container stan-
dards are the major source for chapter 7.
The hospitality and knowledge of a number of people 
were helpful in preparing the second edition of this 
book. At the risk of omitting some, I particularly want 
to mention Mohammed Ali Ahmed, Jan Blomme, Sergio 
Bologna, Justin Boyar, Enrique Clement, Juan Carlos 
Croston, Annik Dirkx, Peter Ford, Hilda Ghiara, Jan 
Goderis, Daniel Isaza, Hercules Haralambides, Jean 
Pierre Lecomte, Sarah Lockie, Khoder Makki, Carlos 
Motta, Linky Motta, Luis Carlos Motta, Stanley Motta, 
Enrico Musso, Jan Nater, Demostenes Perez, Surse Pier-
point, Jorge Quijano, Rodolfo Sabonge, Evert Smit, Car-
xx • Acknowledgments
los Urriola, Mirjam Veldman, Richard de Villiers, and 
Roberta Weisbrod. I also benefited from the insightful 
comments and anecdotes of readers and audience mem-
bers in many countries.
A number of people read portions of the original 
manuscript, caught embarrassing errors, pointed me to 
additional sources, and provided valuable comments. I 
especially wish to thank Jim Doig, Joshua Freeman, Vin-
cent Grey, Les Harlander, Thomas Kessner, Nelson Lich-
tenstein, Kathleen McCarthy, Bruce Nelson, and Judith 
Stein. The material in chapter 5 was presented to the 
Business History Conference, several of whose members 
provided insights and suggestions. Portions of chapter 5 
appeared in Business History Review, whose anony -
mous referees made extremely helpful suggestions, and 
the referees who reviewed the manuscript for Princeton 
University Press did much to improve it. I would also 
like to thank Tim Sullivan, who acquired the manuscript 
for Princeton University Press and who enthusiastically 
shared my vision of this book and my belief that the 
container really did change the world.
Praise for the original edition:
“[A] classic tale of trial and error, and of creative destruction.”
—Virginia Postrel, The New York Times
“Like much of today’s international cargo, Marc Levinson’s The Box 
arrives ‘just in time.’”—Tim W. Ferguson, The Wall Street Journal
“Levinson has produced a marvelous read for anyone who cares about 
how the interconnected world economy came to be.”—Neil Irwin, 
Washington Post
“Ingenious analysis of the phenomenon of containerism.”
—Stefan Stern, Financial Times
“[An] enlightening new history. … [The shipping container] was the 
real-world equivalent of the Internet revolution.”—Justin Fox, Fortune
“The Box makes a strong argument. … Levinson … spins yarns of the 
men who fought to retain the old On the Waterfront ways and of those 
who made the box ubiquitous.”—Michael Arndt, BusinessWeek
“Marc Levinson’s The Box is … broad-ranging and … readable. It de-
scribes not just the amazing course of the container-ship phenomenon 
but the turmoil of human affairs in its wake.”
—Bob Simmons, The Seattle Times
“Mr. Levinson’s elegant weave of transportation economics, innovation, 
and geography is economic history at its accessible best.”
—David K. Hurst, Strategy + Business
“The Box is … an engrossing read. … The book is well-written, with 
detailed notes and an index. I found it absorbing and informative from 
the first page.”—Graham Williams, Sydney Morning Herald
“The Box is highly recommended for anyone with an interest in under-
standing the emergence of our contemporary ‘globalized’ world econo-
my.”—Pierre Desrochers, Independent Review
“A fascinating history of the shipping container.”—Richard N. Cooper, 
Foreign Affairs
“For sheer originality … [this book] by Marc Levinson, is hard to 
beat.”—David Smith, The Sunday Times (London)
“This is a smoothly written history of the ocean shipping container. … 
Marc Levinson turns it into a fascinating economic history of the last 50 
years that helps us to understand globalization and industrial growth in 
North America.”—Harvey Schachter, Globe and Mail
“Excellent.”—J. Bradford DeLong, The Edge Financial Daily
“This is an ingenious analysis of containerization—a process that, 
Levinson argues, in fact made globalization possible.”—Business Voice
“The Box does a fine job of demonstrating how exciting the container 
industry is, and how much economists stand to lose by ignoring it.”
—William Sjostrom, EH.Net
“[T]he insights the book provides make it a worthwhile read for anyone 
interested in how international trade in goods has evolved over the last 
50 years.”—Meredith A. Crowley, World Trade Review
“Marc Levinson’s The Box … illustrates clearly how great risks are tak-
en by entrepreneurs when entrenched interests and government regula-
tors conspire against them. … The story of the shipping container is the 
story of the opponents of innovation.”—Chris Berg, Institute of Public 
Affairs Review
“The shipping container didn’t just rearrange the shipping industry, 
or make winners of some ports (Seattle and Tacoma among them). It 
changed the dynamics and economics of where goods are made and 
shipped to.”—Bill Virgin, Seattle Post-Intelligencer
“A fascinating new book. … [I]t shows vividly how resistance to tech-
nological change caused shipping movements to migrate away from the 
Hudson river to other East Coast ports.”—Management Today
“Using a blend of hard economic data and financial projections, com-
bined with human interest, Levinson manages to provide insights into 
a revolution that changed transport forever and transformed world 
trade.”—Leon Gettler, The Age
“Levinson uses rich detail, a combination of archival and anecdotal 
data to build his story, and is constantly moving across levels of obser -
vation. … And the story of the box is a very good read.”
—Administrative Science Quarterly
“The Box reveals the subject to be interesting and powerful, shedding 
light on all kinds of issues, from the role of trade unions to the Vietnam 
War.”—NUMAST Telegraph
“The Box makes for an excellent primer on innovation, risk taking, and 
strategic thinking. It’s also a thoroughly good read.”
—Craig B. Grossgart, Taiwan Business Topics
“The ubiquitous shipping container … as Mark Levinson’s multilayered 
study shows … has transformed the global economy.”—The Australian
The  
Box

CHAPTER 1
The World the Box Made
On April 26, 1956, a crane lifted fifty- eight aluminum 
truck bodies aboard an aging tanker ship moored in 
Newark, New Jersey. Five days later, the Ideal- X sailed 
into Houston, where fifty- eight trucks waited to take on 
the metal boxes and haul them to their destinations. Such 
was the beginning of a revolution.
Decades later, when enormous trailer trucks rule the 
highways and trains hauling nothing but stacks of boxes 
rumble through the night, it is hard to fathom just how 
much the container has changed the world. In 1956, 
China was not the world’s workshop. It was not routine 
for shoppers to find Brazilian shoes and Mexican vac -
uum cleaners in stores in the middle of Kansas. Japanese 
families did not eat beef from cattle raised in Wyoming, 
and French clothing designers did not have their exclu-
sive apparel cut and sewn in Turkey or Vietnam. Before 
the container, transporting goods was expensive—so ex-
pensive that it did not pay to ship many things halfway 
across the country, much less halfway around the world.
What is it about the container that is so important? 
Surely not the thing itself. A soulless aluminum or steel 
box held together with welds and rivets, with a wooden 
2 • Chapter 1
floor and two enormous doors at one end: the standard 
container has all the romance of a tin can. The value of 
this utilitarian object lies not in what it is, but in how it 
is used. The container is at the core of a highly auto -
mated system for moving goods from anywhere, to any-
where, with a minimum of cost and complication on the 
way.
The container made shipping cheap, and by doing so 
changed the shape of the world economy. The armies of 
ill- paid, ill- treated workers who once made their livings 
loading and unloading ships in every port are no more, 
their tight- knit waterfront communities now just memo-
ries. Cities that had been centers of maritime commerce 
for centuries, such as New York and Liverpool, saw their 
waterfronts decline with startling speed, unsuited to the 
container trade or simply unneeded, and the manufac -
turers that endured high costs and antiquated urban 
plants in order to be near their suppliers and their cus-
tomers have long since moved away. Venerable ship lines 
with century- old pedigrees were crushed by the enor -
mous cost of adapting to container shipping. Merchant 
mariners, who had shipped out to see the world, had 
their traditional days- long shore leave in exotic harbors 
replaced by a few hours ashore at a remote parking lot 
for containers, their vessel ready to weigh anchor the 
instant the high- speed cranes finish putting huge metal 
boxes off and on the ship.
Even as it helped destroy the old economy, the con -
tainer helped build a new one. Sleepy harbors such as 
Busan and Seattle moved into the front ranks of the 
world’s ports, and massive new ports were built in places 
like Felixstowe, in England, and Tanjung Pelepas, in Ma-
The World the Box Made • 3
laysia, where none had been before. Small towns, distant 
from the great population centers, could take advantage 
of their cheap land and low wages to entice factories 
freed from the need to be near a port to enjoy cheap 
transportation. Sprawling industrial complexes where 
armies of thousands manufactured products from start 
to finish gave way to smaller, more specialized plants that 
shipped components and half- finished goods to one an-
other in ever lengthening supply chains. Poor countries, 
desperate to climb the rungs of the ladder of economic 
development, could realistically dream of becoming sup-
pliers to wealthy countries far away. Huge industrial 
complexes mushroomed in places like Los Angeles and 
Hong Kong, only because the cost of bringing raw ma-
terials in and sending finished goods out had dropped 
like a stone.1
This new economic geography allowed firms whose 
ambitions had been purely domestic to become interna-
tional companies, exporting their products almost as ef-
fortlessly as selling them nearby. If they did, though, they 
soon discovered that cheaper shipping benefited manu-
facturers in Thailand or Italy just as much. Those who 
had no wish to go international, who sought only to 
serve their local clientele, learned that they had no choice: 
like it or not, they were competing globally because the 
global market was coming to them. Shipping costs no 
longer offered shelter to high- cost producers whose great 
advantage was physical proximity to their customers; 
even with customs duties and time delays, factories in 
Malaysia could deliver blouses to Macy’s in Herald 
Square more cheaply than could blouse manufacturers 
in the nearby lofts of New York’s garment district. Mul-
4 • Chapter 1
tinational manufacturers—companies with plants in dif-
ferent countries—transformed themselves into interna -
tional manufacturers, integrating once isolated factories 
into networks so that they could choose the cheapest 
location in which to make a particular item, yet still shift 
production from one place to another as costs or ex -
change rates might dictate. In 1956, the world was full 
of small manufacturers selling locally; by the end of the 
twentieth century, purely local markets for goods of any 
sort were few and far between.
For workers, of course, this has all been a mixed bless-
ing. As consumers, they enjoy infinitely more choices 
thanks to the global trade the container has stimulated. 
By one careful study, the United States imported four 
times as many varieties of goods in 2002 as in 1972, 
generating a consumer benefit—not counted in official 
statistics—equal to nearly 3 percent of the entire econ-
omy. The competition that came with increased trade has 
diffused new products with remarkable speed and has 
held down prices so that average households can par -
take. The ready availability of inexpensive imported con-
sumer goods has boosted living standards around the 
world.2
As wage earners, on the other hand, workers have 
every reason to be ambivalent. In the decades after World 
War II, wartime devastation created vast demand while 
low levels of international trade kept competitive forces 
under control. In this exceptional environment, workers 
and trade unions in North America, Western Europe, and 
Japan were able to negotiate nearly continuous improve-
ments in wages and benefits, while government programs 
provided ever stronger safety nets. The workweek grew 
The World the Box Made • 5
shorter, disability pay was made more generous, and re-
tirement at sixty or sixty- two became the norm. The con-
tainer helped bring an end to that unprecedented ad -
vance. Low shipping costs helped make capital even 
more mobile, increasing the bargaining power of em -
ployers against their far less mobile workers. In this 
highly integrated world economy, the pay of workers in 
Shenzhen sets limits on wages in South Carolina, and 
when the French government ordered a shorter work -
week with no cut in pay, it discovered that nearly fric -
tionless, nearly costless shipping made it easy for manu-
facturers to avoid the higher cost by moving abroad.
3
A modern containerport is a factory whose scale strains 
the limits of imagination. At each berth—the world’s big-
gest ports have dozens—rides a mammoth oceangoing 
vessel, up to 1,400 feet long and 194 feet across, carrying 
nothing but metal containers. The deck is crowded with 
row after row of them, red and blue and green and silver, 
stacked 15 or 20 abreast and 8 or 10 high. Beneath the 
deck are yet more containers, stacked 6 or 8 deep in the 
holds. The structure that houses the crew quarters, 
topped by the navigation bridge, is toward the stern, 
barely visible above the stacks of boxes. The crew ac -
commodations are small, but so is the crew. A ship car-
rying 9,000 40- foot containers, filled with 200,000 tons 
of shoes and clothes and electronics, may make the three- 
week transit from Hong Kong through the Suez Canal to 
Germany with only twenty people on board.
4
On the wharf, a row of cranes goes into action almost 
as soon as the ship ties up. The cranes are huge steel 
structures, rising 200 feet into the air and weighing more 
6 • Chapter 1
than two million pounds. Their legs stretch 50 feet apart, 
easily wide enough for several truck lanes or even train 
tracks to pass beneath. The cranes rest on rails running 
parallel to the ship’s side, so that they can move forward 
or aft as required. Each crane extends a boom 115 feet 
above the dock and long enough to span the width of a 
ship broader than the Panama Canal.
High up in each crane, an operator controls a trolley 
able to travel the length of the boom, and from each trol-
ley hangs a spreader, a steel frame designed to lock onto 
all four top corners of a 25- ton box. As unloading be -
gins, each operator moves his trolley out the boom to a 
precise location above the ship, lowers the spreader to 
engage a container, raises the container up toward the 
trolley, and pulls trolley and container quickly toward 
the wharf. The trolley stops above a rubber- tired trans-
porter waiting between the crane’s legs, the container is 
lowered onto the transporter, and the spreader releases 
its grip. The transporter then moves the container to the 
adjacent storage yard, while the trolley moves back out 
over the ship to pick up another box. The process is re-
peated every two minutes, or even every ninety seconds, 
each crane moving 30 or 40 boxes an hour from ship to 
dock. As parts of the ship are cleared of incoming con-
tainers, reloading begins, and dockside activity becomes 
even more frenzied. Each time the crane places an incom-
ing container on one vehicle, it picks up an outbound 
container from another, simultaneously emptying and 
filling the ship.
In the yard, a mile- long strip paved with asphalt, the 
incoming container is driven beneath a stacking crane. 
The stacker has rubber- tired wheels 50 feet apart, wide 
The World the Box Made • 7
enough to span a truck lane and four adjacent stacks of 
containers. The wheels are linked by a metal structure 70 
feet in the air, so that the entire machine can move back 
and forth above the rows of containers stacked six high. 
The crane engages the container, lifts it from the trans-
porter, and moves it across the stacks of other containers 
to its storage location. A few hours later, the process will 
be reversed, as the stacking crane lifts the container onto 
a steel chassis pulled by an over- the- road truck. The 
truck may take the cargo hundreds of miles to its des-
tination or may haul it to a nearby rail yard, where  
low- slung cars specially designed for containers await 
loading.
The colorful chaos of the old- time pier is nowhere in 
evidence at a major container terminal, the brawny long-
shoremen carrying bags of coffee on their shoulders no-
where to be seen. Terry Malloy, the muscular hero played 
by Marlon Brando in On the Waterfront, would not be 
at home. Almost every one of the intricate movements 
required to service a vessel is choreographed by a com-
puter long before the ship arrives. Computers, and the 
vessel planners who use them, determine the order in 
which the containers are to be discharged, to speed the 
process without destabilizing the ship.
The actions of the container cranes and the equip -
ment in the yard all are programmed in advance. The 
longshoreman who operates each crane faces a screen 
telling him which container is to be handled next and 
may well be seated in a windowless room in a nearby 
building, driving the crane by remote control rather than 
high in the air. The vehicles on the dock have screens 
directing where each container is to be moved, unless 
8 • Chapter 1
the terminal dispenses with longshoremen by using driv-
erless transporters to pick up the containers at shipside 
and centrally controlled stacker cranes to handle con -
tainer storage. The computers have determined that the 
truck picking up incoming container ABLQ 998435 
should be summoned to the terminal at 10:45 a.m., and 
that outgoing container JKFC 119395, a 40- foot box 
bound for Newark, carrying 56,800 pounds of machin-
ery and currently stacked at yard location A- 52- G- 6, 
will be loaded third from the bottom in the fourth slot 
in the second row of the forward hold. They have en -
sured that the refrigerated containers are placed in bays 
with electrical hookups, and that containers with haz -
ardous contents are apart from containers that could 
increase the risk of explosion. The entire operation runs 
like clockwork, with no tolerance for error or human 
foibles. Within twenty- four hours, the ship discharges 
its thousands of containers, takes on thousands more, 
and steams on its way.
Every day at every major port, thousands of contain-
ers arrive and depart by truck and train. Loaded trucks 
stream through the gates, where scanners read the unique 
number on each container and computers compare it 
against ships’ manifests before the trucker is told where 
to drop his load. Tractor units arrive to hook up chassis 
and haul away containers that have just come off the 
ship. Trains carrying nothing but double- stacked con -
tainers roll into an intermodal terminal close to the dock, 
where giant cranes straddle the entire train, working 
their way along as they remove one container after an-
other. Outbound container trains, destined for a rail yard 
two thousand miles away with only the briefest of stops 
The World the Box Made • 9
en route, are assembled on the same tracks and loaded 
by the same cranes.
The result of all this hectic activity is a nearly seamless 
system for shipping freight around the world. A 25- ton 
container of coffeemakers can leave a factory in Malay-
sia, be loaded aboard a ship, and cover the 9,000 miles 
to Los Angeles in 23 days. A day later, the container is on 
a unit train to Chicago, where it is transferred immedi-
ately to a truck headed for Cincinnati. The 11,000- mile 
trip from the factory gate to the Ohio warehouse can 
take as little as 28 days, a rate of 400 miles per day, at a 
cost lower than that of a single business- class airline 
ticket. More than likely, no one has touched the contents, 
or even opened the container, along the way.
This high- efficiency transportation machine is a bless-
ing for exporters and importers, but it has become a 
curse for customs inspectors and security officials. Each 
container is accompanied by a manifest listing its con -
tents, but neither ship lines nor ports can vouch that 
what is on the manifest corresponds to what is inside. 
Nor is there any easy way to check: opening the doors at 
the end of the box normally reveals only a wall of paper-
board cartons. With a single ship able to disgorge 9,000 
40- foot- long containers in a matter of hours, and with a 
port such as Busan or Rotterdam handling perhaps 
40,000 loaded containers on the average workday, and 
with each container itself holding row after row of boxes 
stacked floor to ceiling, not even the most careful exam-
iners have a remote prospect of inspecting it all. Contain-
ers can be just as efficient for smuggling undeclared mer-
chandise, illegal drugs, undocumented immigrants, and 
terrorist bombs as for moving legitimate cargo.
5
10 • Chapter 1
Getting from the Ideal- X to a system that moves tens of 
millions of boxes each year was not an easy voyage. Both 
the container’s promoters and its opponents sensed from 
the very beginning that this was an invention that could 
change the way the world works. That first container 
voyage of 1956, an idea turned into reality by the cease-
less drive of an entrepreneur who knew nothing about 
ships, unleashed more than a decade of battle around the 
world. Many titans of the transportation industry sought 
to stifle the container. Powerful labor leaders pulled out 
all the stops to block its ascent, triggering strikes in doz-
ens of harbors. Some ports spent heavily to promote it, 
while others spent huge sums for traditional piers and 
warehouses in the vain hope that the container would 
prove a passing fad. Governments reacted with confu -
sion, trying to figure out how to capture its benefits with-
out disturbing the profits, jobs, and social arrangements 
that were tied to the status quo. Even seemingly simple 
matters, such as the design of the steel fitting that allows 
almost any crane in any port to lift almost any container, 
were settled only after years of contention. In the end, it 
took a major war, the United States’ painful campaign in 
Vietnam, to prove the merit of this revolutionary ap -
proach to moving freight.
How much the container matters to the world econ-
omy has proven challenging to quantify. In the ideal 
world, we would like to know how much it cost to send 
one thousand men’s shirts from Bangkok to Geneva in 
1955, and to track how that cost changed as container-
ization came into use. Such data do not exist, but it seems 
clear that the container brought sweeping reductions in 
the cost of moving freight. From a tiny tanker laden with 
The World the Box Made • 11
a few dozen containers that would not fit on any other 
vessel, container shipping matured into a highly auto -
mated, highly standardized industry on a global scale. An 
enormous containership can be loaded with a minute 
fraction of the labor and time required to handle a small 
conventional ship half a century ago. A few crew mem-
bers can manage an oceangoing vessel longer than four 
football fields. A trucker can deposit a trailer at a cus-
tomer’s loading dock, hook up another trailer, and drive 
on immediately, rather than watching his expensive rig 
stand idle while the contents are removed. All of those 
changes are consequences of the container revolution. 
Transportation has become so efficient that for many 
purposes, freight costs do not much effect economic de-
cisions. As economists Edward L. Glaeser and Janet E. 
Kohlhase suggest, “It is better to assume that moving 
goods is essentially costless than to assume that moving 
goods is an important component of the production 
process.” Before the container, such a statement was 
unimaginable.6
In 1961, before the container was in international use, 
ocean freight costs alone accounted for 12 percent of the 
value of U.S. exports and 10 percent of the value of U.S. 
imports. “These costs are more significant in many cases 
than governmental trade barriers,” the staff of the Joint 
Economic Committee of Congress advised, noting that 
the average U.S. import tariff was 7 percent. And ocean 
freight, dear as it was, represented only a fraction of the 
total cost of moving goods from one country to another. 
A pharmaceutical company would have paid approxi -
mately $2,400 to ship a truckload of medicines from the 
U.S. Midwest to an interior city in Europe in 1960 (see 
12 • Chapter 1
table 1). This might have included payments to a dozen 
different vendors: a local trucker in Chicago, the railroad 
that carried the truck trailer on a flatcar to New York or 
Baltimore, a local trucker in the port city, a port ware-
house, a steamship company, a warehouse and a trucking 
company in Europe, an insurer, a European customs ser-
vice, and the freight forwarder who put all the pieces of 
this complicated journey together. Half the total outlay 
went for port costs.
7
This process was so expensive that in many cases sell-
ing internationally was not worthwhile. “For some com-
modities, the freight may be as much as 25 per cent of 
the cost of the product,” two engineers concluded after 
a careful study of data from 1959. Shipping steel pipe 
from New York to Brazil cost an average of $57 per ton 
in 1962, or 13 percent of the average cost of the pipe 
being exported—a figure that did not include the cost of 
getting the pipe from the steel mill to the dock. Shipping 
refrigerators from London to Capetown cost the equiva-
Table 1. Cost of Shipping One Truckload of Medicine from Chicago to 
Nancy, France (estimate ca. 1960)
Cash Outlay Percent of Cost
Freight to U.S. port city $341 14.3%
Local freight in port vicinity $95 4.0%
Total port cost $1,163 48.7%
Ocean shipping $581 24.4%
European inland freight $206 8.6%
Total $2,386
Source: American Association of Port Authority data reported by John L. Eyre. 
See note 7 to this chapter.
The World the Box Made • 13
lent of 68 U.S. cents per cubic foot, adding $20 to the 
wholesale price of a midsize unit. No wonder that, rela-
tive to the size of the economy, U.S. international trade 
was smaller in 1960 than it had been in 1950, or even in 
the Depression year of 1930. The cost of conducting 
trade had gotten so high that in many cases trading made 
no sense.8
By far the biggest expense in this process was shifting 
the cargo from land transport to ship at the port of de-
parture and moving it back to truck or train at the other 
end of the ocean voyage. As one expert explained, “A 
four thousand mile voyage for a shipment might con -
sume 50 percent of its costs in covering just the two ten- 
mile movements through two ports.” These were the 
costs that the container affected first, as the elimination 
of piece- by- piece freight handling brought lower ex -
penses for longshore labor, insurance, pier rental, and the 
like. Containers were quickly adopted for land transpor-
tation, and the reduction in loading time and transship-
ment cost lowered rates for goods that moved entirely by 
land. As ship lines built huge vessels specially designed 
to handle containers, ocean freight rates plummeted. 
And as container shipping became intermodal, with a 
seamless shifting of containers among ships and trucks 
and trains, goods could move in a never- ending stream 
from Asian factories directly to the stockrooms of retail 
stores in North America or Europe, making the overall 
cost of transporting goods little more than a footnote in 
a company’s cost analysis.
9
Transport efficiencies, though, hardly begin to capture 
the economic impact of containerization. The container 
not only lowered freight bills, it saved time. Quicker han-
14 • Chapter 1
dling and less time in storage translated to faster transit 
from manufacturer to customer, reducing the cost of fi-
nancing inventories sitting unproductively on railway 
sidings or in pierside warehouses awaiting a ship. The 
container, combined with the computer, made it practical 
for companies like Toyota and Honda to develop just- in- 
time manufacturing, in which a supplier makes the goods 
its customer wants only as the customer needs them and 
then ships them, in containers, to arrive at a specified 
time. Such precision, unimaginable before the container, 
has led to massive reductions in manufacturers’ invento-
ries and correspondingly huge cost savings. Retailers 
have applied those same lessons, using careful logistics 
management to squeeze out billions of dollars of costs.
These savings in freight costs, in inventory costs, and 
in time to market have encouraged ever- longer supply 
chains, allowing buyers in one country to purchase from 
sellers halfway around the globe with little fear that the 
gaskets will not arrive when needed or that the dolls will 
not be on the toy store shelf before Christmas. The more 
reliable these supply chains become, the further retailers, 
wholesalers, and manufacturers are willing to reach in 
search of lower production costs—and the more likely it 
becomes that workers will feel the sting of dislocation as 
their employers find distant sources of supply.
Some scholars have argued that reductions in trans -
port costs thanks to the container are at best marginal 
improvements that have had negligible effects on trade 
flows. This book disputes that view. In the decade after 
the container first came into international use, in 1966, 
the volume of international trade in manufactured goods 
grew more than twice as fast as the volume of global 
The World the Box Made • 15
manufacturing production, and two and a half times as 
fast as global economic output. Something was accel-
erating the growth of trade even though the economic 
expansion that normally stimulates trade was weak. 
Something was driving a vast increase in international 
commerce in manufactured goods even though oil shocks 
were making the world economy sluggish. While attrib-
uting the vast changes in the world economy to a single 
cause would be foolhardy, we should not dismiss out of 
hand the possibility that the extremely sharp drop in 
freight costs played a major role in increasing the inte-
gration of the global economy.
10
The subject of this book lies at the confluence of several 
major streams of research. One delves into the impact of 
changes in transportation technology, a venerable sub -
ject for both historians and economists. The steamship, 
invented in the 1780s and put to regular use by 1807, 
strengthened New York City’s prominence as a port, 
and the Erie Canal, an undertaking of unprecedented 
size, had an even greater impact. The radical decline in 
ocean freight rates during the nineteenth century, the re-
sult of technological change and improved navigation 
techniques, encouraged a huge increase in world trade 
and added to Europe’s eagerness to found colonies. The 
connection between railroad development and U.S. eco-
nomic growth has been debated strenuously, but there is 
little dispute that lower rail freight rates increased agri -
cultural productivity, knitted the North together before 
the Civil War, and eventually made Chicago the hub of 
a region stretching a thousand miles to the west. A 
transport innovation of the 1880s, the refrigerated rail-
16 • Chapter 1
car, made meat affordable for average households by al-
lowing meat companies to ship carcasses rather than 
live animals across the country. The truck and the pas -
senger car reshaped urban development starting in the 
1920s, and more recently commercial aviation redrew 
the economic map by bringing formerly isolated com -
munities within a few hours of major cities. This book 
will argue that container shipping has had a similarly 
large effect in stimulating trade and economic develop -
ment—and that, as with steamships, railroads, and air -
planes, government intervention both encouraged and 
deterred its growth.11
The importance of innovation is at the center of a 
second, and rapidly growing, body of research. Capital, 
labor, and land, the basic factors of production, have lost 
much of their fascination for those looking to under -
stand why economies grow and prosper. The key ques-
tion asked today is no longer how much capital and 
labor an economy can amass, but how innovation helps 
employ those resources more effectively to produce more 
goods and services. This line of research makes clear that 
new technology, by itself, has little economic benefit. As 
economist Nathan Rosenberg observed, “Innovations in 
their early stages are usually exceedingly ill- adapted to 
the wide range of more specialised uses to which they are 
eventually put.” Resistance to new methods can impede 
their adoption. Potential users may avoid commitments 
until the future is more certain; as early buyers of Beta-
max video players can attest, it is risky to bet on a tech-
nology that turns out to be a dead end. Even after a new 
technology is proven, its spread must often wait until 
prior investments have been recouped; although Thomas 
The World the Box Made • 17
Edison invented the incandescent light bulb by 1879, 
only 3 percent of U.S. homes had electric lighting twenty 
years later. The economic benefits arise not from innova-
tion itself, but from the entrepreneurs who eventually 
discover ways to put innovations to practical use—and 
most critically, as economists Erik Brynjolfsson and 
Lorin M. Hitt have pointed out, from the organizational 
changes through which businesses reshape themselves to 
take advantage of the new technology.
12
This book contends that, just as decades elapsed be -
tween the taming of electricity in the 1870s and the wide-
spread use of electrical power, so too did the embrace of 
containerization take time. Big savings in the cost of han-
dling cargo on the docks did not translate immediately 
into big savings in the total cost of transportation. Trans-
portation companies were generally ill- equipped to ex-
ploit the container’s advantages, and their customers had 
designed their operations around different assumptions 
about costs. Only with time, as container shipping devel-
oped into an entirely new system of moving goods by 
land and sea, did it begin to affect trade patterns and in-
dustrial location. Not until firms learned to take advan-
tage of the opportunities the container created did it 
change the world. Once the world began to change, it 
changed very rapidly: the more organizations that ad -
opted the container, the more costs fell, and the cheaper 
and more ubiquitous container transportation became.
13
The third intellectual stream feeding into this book is 
the connection between transportation costs and eco -
nomic geography, the question of who makes what 
where. This connection might seem self- evident, but it is 
not. When David Ricardo showed in 1817 that both Por-
18 • Chapter 1
tugal and England could gain by specializing in making 
products in which they had a comparative advantage, he 
assumed that only production costs mattered; the costs 
of shipping Portuguese wine to England and English 
cloth to Portugal did not enter into his analysis. Ricar -
do’s assumption that transportation costs were zero has 
been incorporated into economists’ models ever since, 
despite ample real- world evidence that transportation 
costs matter a great deal.14
Economists have devoted serious effort to studying 
the geographic implications of transport costs only since 
the early 1990s. This new stream of work shows for -
mally what common sense suggests. When transport 
costs are high, manufacturers’ main concern is to locate 
near their customers, even if this requires undesirably 
small plants or high operating costs. As transportation 
costs decline relative to other costs, manufacturers can 
relocate first domestically, and then internationally, to 
reduce other costs, which come to loom larger. Global-
ization, the diffusion of economic activity without re -
gard for national boundaries, is the logical end point of 
this process. As transport costs fall to extremely low lev-
els, producers move from high- wage to low- wage coun-
tries, eventually causing wage levels in all countries to 
converge. These geographic shifts can occur quickly and 
suddenly, leaving long- standing industrial infrastructure 
underutilized or abandoned as economic activity moves 
on.
15
Have declines in the cost of shipping really caused 
such significant economic shifts? Some scholars doubt 
that ocean freight costs have fallen very much since the 
The World the Box Made • 19
middle of the twentieth century. Others, pointing to the 
undeniable fact that countries trade much more with 
neighbors than with distant lands, argue that transporta-
tion costs still matter a great deal. The present work in-
tentionally takes a nonquantitative approach in address-
ing these questions. The data on freight costs from the 
mid- 1950s through the 1970s are so severely deficient 
that they will never provide conclusive proof, but the 
undisputed fact that the transportation world raced to 
embrace containerization is very strong evidence that 
this new shipping technology significantly reduced costs. 
Nor does this book employ economic models to prove 
the container’s impact. Given the vast changes in the 
world economy over a span that saw the breakdown of 
the exchange- rate system, repeated oil crises, the end of 
colonialism, the invention of jet travel, the spread of 
computers, the construction of hundreds of thousands of 
miles of expressways, and many other developments, the 
impact of containerization is difficult to distinguish from 
that of many other forces. Nonetheless, dramatic shifts 
in trade patterns and in the location of economic activity 
over the past half century suggest that the connection 
between containerization and changes in economic geog-
raphy is extremely strong.16
Mysteriously, the container escaped all three of these 
very lively fields of research until quite recently. It has no 
engine, no wheels, no sails: it does not fascinate those 
captivated by ships and trains and planes, or by sailors 
and pilots. It lacks the flash to draw attention from those 
who study technological innovation. And so many forces 
have combined to alter economic geography since the 
20 • Chapter 1
middle of the twentieth century that the container is eas-
ily overlooked. There was, for half a century after its 
arrival, no general history of the container.17
In telling the remarkable story of containerization, 
this book represents an attempt to fill that historical 
void. It treats containerization not as shipping news, but 
as a development that has sweeping consequences for 
workers and consumers all around the globe. Without it, 
the world would be a very different place.
CHAPTER 2
Gridlock on the Docks
In the early 1950s, before container shipping was even 
a concept, most of the world’s great centers of commerce 
had docks at their hearts. Freight transportation was an 
urban industry, employing millions of people who drove, 
dragged, or pushed cargo through city streets to or from 
the piers. On the waterfront itself, swarms of workers 
clambered up gangplanks with loads on their backs or 
toiled deep in the holds of ships, stowing boxes and bar-
rels in every available corner. Warehouses stood at the 
heads of many of the wharves, and where there were no 
warehouses, there were factories. As they had for centu-
ries, manufacturers still clustered near the docks for 
easier delivery of raw materials and faster shipment of 
finished goods. Whether in San Francisco or Montreal, 
Hamburg or London, Rio or Buenos Aires, the surround-
ing neighborhoods were filled with households that 
made their livings from the port, bound together by the 
special nature of waterfront work and the unique culture 
that developed from it.
Though ships had been plying the seas for thousands 
of years, using them to move goods was still a hugely 
complicated project in the 1950s. At the shipper’s factory 
22 • Chapter 2
or warehouse, the freight would be loaded piece by piece 
on a truck or railcar. The truck or train would deliver 
hundreds or thousands of such items to the waterfront. 
Each had to be unloaded separately, recorded on a tally 
sheet, and carried to storage in a transit shed, a ware -
house stretching alongside the dock. When a ship was 
ready to load, each item was removed from the transit 
shed, counted once more, and hauled or dragged to ship-
side. The dock would be covered with a jumble of paper-
board cartons and wooden crates and casks. There might 
be steel drums of cleaning compound and beef tallow 
alongside 440- pound bales of cotton and animal skins. 
Borax in sacks so heavy it took two men to lift them, 
loose pieces of lumber, baskets of freshly picked oranges, 
barrels of olives, and coils of steel wire might all be part 
of the same load of “mixed cargo,” waiting on the dock 
amid a tangle of ropes and cables, as lift trucks and 
handcarts darted back and forth.
Getting all of this loaded was the job of the longshore-
men, or dockers. On the dock or in the pierside ware -
house, a gang of longshore workers would assemble 
various boxes and barrels into a “draft” of cargo atop a 
wooden pallet, the sling board. Some sling loads were 
wrapped in rope or netting, but pallets often held stacks 
of loose cartons or bags. When the draft was ready, the 
longshoremen on the dock would slip cables beneath the 
sling board and tie the ends together. On the ship’s deck, 
the winch driver, or “deck man,” waited for his signal. 
When it came, he positioned the hook of the shipboard 
crane over the sling. The dockside men placed the cables 
on the hook, and the winch hoisted the draft from the 
dock, maneuvered it over an open hatch, and lowered it 
Gridlock on the Docks • 23
into the hold. The hook was released quickly and lifted 
out to grab another load, lest the foreman complain that 
“the hook is hanging.” Meanwhile, in the dimness of the 
ship’s interior, another gang of longshoremen removed 
each item from the sling board and found a secure place 
to stow it, maneuvering it into position with a four- 
wheeled cart, a forklift, or brute force. Every longshore-
man carried a steel hook with a wooden handle, designed 
to grab a recalcitrant piece of cargo and jerk it into place 
under power of nothing but human muscle.
Unloading could be just as difficult. An arriving ship 
might be carrying 100- kilo bags of sugar or 20- pound 
cheeses nestled next to 2- ton steel coils. Simply moving 
one without damaging the other was hard enough. A 
winch could lift the coiled steel out of the hold, but the 
sugar and cheese needed men to lift them. Unloading 
bananas required the longshoremen to walk down a 
gangplank carrying 80- pound stems of hard fruit on 
their shoulders. Moving coffee meant carrying fifteen 60- 
kilo bags to a wooden pallet placed in the hold, letting a 
winch lift the pallet to the dock, and then removing each 
bag from the pallet and stacking it atop a massive pile. 
The work could be brutally physical. In Edinburgh, un-
loading a hold full of bagged cement meant digging 
through a thirty- foot- high pile of dusty bags, tightly 
packed together, and lifting them into a sling, one by one. 
Copper came from Peru to New York in the form of bars 
too big for a man to handle. Longshoremen had to move 
these enormous hunks of metal across the dock, from the 
incoming ship to a lighter, or barge, which would trans-
port them to a plant in New Jersey. “Because they had to 
bend over to do that, you’d see these fellows going home 
24 • Chapter 2
at the end of the day kind of like orangutans,” a former 
pier superintendent remembered. “I mean, they were just 
kind of all bent, and they’d eventually straighten up for 
the next day.”
1
Automation had arrived during World War II, but in 
a very limited way. Forklifts, used in industry since the 
1920s, were widely used by the 1950s to move pallets 
from the warehouse to the side of the ship, and some 
ports installed conveyors to unload bags of coffee and 
potatoes. Even with machinery at hand, though, muscle 
was often the ultimate solution. Longshoremen had to 
be prepared to handle small cartons of delicate tropical 
fruits one day, tons of filthy carbon black the next. They 
labored sometimes in daylight, sometimes at night, in 
all weather conditions. Sweltering holds, icy docks, and 
rain- slicked gangways were part of the job. The risk of 
tripping over a load of pipe or being knocked down by 
a draft on the hook was ever present. In Marseilles, 
forty- seven dockworkers were killed on the job between 
1947 and 1957, while in Manchester, where dockers 
serviced oceangoing vessels that ascended a canal from 
the Irish Sea, one out of two longshoremen suffered an 
injury in 1950, and one out of six landed in the hospi-
tal. New York, with a lesser injury rate, reported 2,208 
serious accidents in 1950. Government safety rules and 
inspections were almost nonexistent. Outsiders may 
have found romance and working- class solidarity in 
dock labor, but for the men on the docks it was an un-
pleasant and often dangerous job, with an injury rate 
three times that of construction work and eight times 
that in manufacturing.2
Gridlock on the Docks • 25
The ships of the era were breakbulk vessels, built with 
several levels of open space below deck to handle almost 
any kind of dry cargo.* Much of the world’s commercial 
fleet had been destroyed during the war, but nearly 3,000 
U.S. merchant ships survived and were available for mer-
chant service by 1946. Among them were more than 
2,400 of the Liberty Ships that U.S. shipyards had turned 
out between 1941 and 1945. Designed as convoy vessels 
and built in fewer than 70 days from prefabricated parts, 
the Liberty Ships were very slow and cheap enough to be 
expendable. The vessels were deliberately built small so 
that little cargo would be lost if a ship were sunk by Ger-
man submarines; Liberty Ships were just 441 feet long. 
In 1944, U.S. shipyards started to make Victory Ships, 
which were much faster than the 11- knot** Liberty Ships 
but only a few feet longer and wider. The U.S. Navy sold 
450 Liberty Ships to U.S. merchant lines after the war, 
and sold another 450 or so for commercial use in Europe 
and China. More than 540 Victory Ships outlasted the 
war, and the navy began selling them off in late 1945 as 
well.
3
Neither type of vessel was designed for commercial 
efficiency. The interiors were cramped. The curvature of 
the ships’ sides meant that the five small holds on each 
vessel were wider near the top and narrower at the bot-
* “Bulk” cargo usually refers to commodities such as coal or grain, which 
can be loaded on a ship in a continuous process without packaging or sorting. 
“Breakbulk” cargo, by contrast, consists of discrete items that must be han-
dled individually.
** A nautical mile is equal to approximately 6,080 feet, 1.15 statute miles, 
and 1.85 kilometers. A speed of 11 knots, or nautical miles per hour, is equiv-
alent to 12.7 statute miles per hour, or 20.7 kilometers per hour.
26 • Chapter 2
tom, and more spacious toward the middle of the vessel 
than forward or aft. Longshoremen had to know how to 
fill these odd dimensions: for the shipowner, wasted 
space meant money lost. Each hold was covered by its 
own hatch, a watertight metal cover secured to the deck; 
cargo for the first port of call had to be loaded last so it 
would be near a hatch, available for easy unloading, 
while cargo for the final port on the ship’s itinerary was 
shoved to the distant corners of the hold. At the same 
time, every single piece of freight had to be stowed tightly 
so that it would not shift as the ship rolled at sea; a loose 
box or barrel could break, damaging the contents and 
other cargo as well. Experienced longshoremen knew 
which items to push into the irregular spaces along the 
outside walls and which to weave into interior bulk -
heads, intermingling cartons and sacks and lumber into 
temporary walls to keep the cargo wedged in place while 
still having it available for discharge when the ship 
reached port. Mistakes could be fatal. If a load shifted in 
an ocean swell, the ship could capsize.
4
At journey’s end, loading for the next voyage could 
not begin until every bit of incoming cargo had been 
removed. Cargo in the hold was too tightly packed to be 
sorted, so longshoremen often piled things on the dock 
and then picked through them, checking labels and tags 
to figure out what should be moved to the transit shed 
and what was being picked up on the spot. If the ship 
was arriving from abroad, customs inspectors walked 
the pier prying open crates to assess duties. Buyers’ rep-
resentatives came onto the dock to make sure their or -
ders had arrived in good shape, and meat and produce 
dealers sent agents around to sample the new merchan-
Gridlock on the Docks • 27
dise. The longshore workforce included a small army of 
carpenters and coopers, whose job was to repair broken 
crates and barrels once these various inspectors were 
done. At that point, noisy diesel trucks might back onto 
the dock to pick up their loads, while forklifts would 
move other cargo off to the transit sheds. Moving an 
incoming shipload of mixed cargo from ship to transit 
shed and then taking on an outbound load could keep a 
vessel tied up at the dock for a week or more.
5
These waterfront realities meant that shipping was a 
highly labor- intensive industry in the postwar era. De -
pression and war had sharply curtailed the construction 
of privately built merchant vessels since the 1920s, so 
ship operators had little capital invested in the business. 
In the United States, total private outlays for ships and 
barges from 1930 through 1951 amounted to only $2.5 
billion, which was less than shipowners had invested 
during the decade of the 1920s. Ship lines could buy 
surplus Liberty Ships, Victory Ships, and tankers for as 
little as $300,000 apiece, so the carrying cost of ships 
that were sitting in port rather than earning revenue was 
not a major expense. Outlays for shoreside facilities were 
negligible. The big cost item was the wages of longshore 
gangs, which could eat up half the total expense of an 
ocean voyage. Add in the tonnage fees paid to pier own-
ers and “60 to 75 percent of the cost of transporting 
cargo by sea is accounted for by what takes place while 
the ship is at the dock and not by steaming time,” two 
analysts concluded in 1959. There was little sense invest-
ing in fancier docks or bigger vessels when the need to 
handle cargo by hand made it hard to cut turnaround 
times and use docks and ships more efficiently.6
28 • Chapter 2
One fact above all had traditionally defined life along the 
waterfront: employment was highly irregular. One day, 
the urgent need to unload perishable cargo could create 
jobs for all comers. The next day, there might be no work 
at all. A port needed a big labor supply to handle the 
peaks, but on an average day the demand for workers 
was much smaller. Longshoremen, truckers, and ware -
house workers were caught up in a world of contingent 
labor that shaped the communities built around the 
docks.7
Almost everywhere, longshoremen had been forced to 
compete for work each morning in an age- old ritual. In 
America, it was known as shape- up. The Australians 
called it the pick- up. The British had a more descriptive 
name: the scramble. In most places, the process involved 
begging, flattery, and kickbacks to get a day’s work. In 
1930s Edinburgh, “the foremen got up on the platform 
about five tae eight in the mornin’ and it wis jus a mad 
scramble for a damned job,” remembered Scottish long-
shoreman George Baxter. The same had been true in 
Portland, Oregon: “They would hire their gangs and 
maybe you would be on that dock at seven o’clock Tues-
day morning. And maybe that ship would get in at nine 
o’clock Tuesday night. But you didn’t dare leave. You 
were hired, but you weren’t getting paid.” In Marseilles, 
the workday in 1947 began at 6:30 in Place de la Juliette, 
where workers milled on the sidewalks in the winter 
darkness until a foreman made a sign to the workers he 
wanted; the chosen could proceed to a nearby cafe to 
await the start of work, while the others went looking 
for another foreman. In San Francisco, men shaped on 
the sidewalk near the Ferry Building. In Liverpool, they 
Gridlock on the Docks • 29
congregated beneath the concrete structure of the “dock-
ers’ umbrella,” more formally known as the Liverpool 
Overhead Railway, and waited for a foreman to come 
and tap them on the shoulder.8
The shape- up was more than just a ritual. It was an 
invitation to corruption. On the Waterfront was a dra-
matization, but payments to pier foremen were often the 
price of getting work. Newark longshoreman Morris 
Mullman testified that he could no longer get hired after 
declining to contribute to a union official’s “vacation 
fund” in 1953. In New Orleans, a weekly payoff of two 
or three dollars was the norm to secure work the follow-
ing week. Compulsory bets were another means of ex -
tracting money from the men; workers who failed to bet 
might find it difficult to get selected for work. In many 
ports, foremen commonly had a side business in money-
lending. Liverpool dock foremen specializing in forced 
lending were called “gombeen men,” a term derived from 
“gaimbin,” an Irish word meaning usury. By taking a 
loan to be repaid with a threepenny premium on every 
shilling—25 percent interest for just a brief period of 
borrowing—a docker could be assured of being hired, 
because he knew that the gombeen man would take re-
payment from his wages.
9
Pressure from labor unions and governments gradu -
ally eliminated some of the worst excesses of the shape-
 up. On the U.S. Pacific Coast, employers lost control of 
the hiring process after a bitter strike in 1934; thereafter, 
the order of hiring was determined by the public drawing 
of longshoremen’s badge numbers each morning in the 
shelter of a union- controlled hiring hall. The Australian 
Stevedoring Board took over longshore work assign -
30 • Chapter 2
ments after World War II, and the creation of Britain’s 
National Dock Labour Board in 1947 did away with the 
scramble. In Rotterdam, violent strikes over working 
conditions in 1945 and 1946 persuaded employers that 
they were better off with full- time staff than with occa-
sional labor; by 1952, more than half the port’s long -
shoremen worked regularly for a single company. New 
Zealand and France started government agencies to 
regulate longshore hiring. The Waterfront Commission 
of New York Harbor, created by the states of New York 
and New Jersey to fight corruption on the docks, took 
charge of hiring in the Port of New York in 1953.10
These reforms led to a major change in the nature of 
waterfront employment. Although the longshore labor 
force was vast in the years after World War II—more 
than 51,000 men worked as dockers in New York in 
1951, and there were 50,000 registered dockers in Lon-
don—very few of these men had full- time jobs. With the 
end of the shape- up, governments and unions sought to 
raise longshoremen’s incomes by restricting the supply of 
labor, especially “casual labor,” the men who shaped 
only when their off- dock work fell through. New rules 
limited or blocked entry into the dockworker profession. 
Authorized longshoremen were required to obtain regis-
tration books, and ship lines and stevedore companies 
were barred from hiring anyone other than a registered 
longshoreman assigned by the hiring hall. The men who 
registered were assigned hiring categories based on their 
seniority. Hiring began with men in the highest cate -
gory—the “A” men in New York, the professionnels in 
Marseilles—being selected in random order, and less se-
nior workers could not get on until all higher- category 
Gridlock on the Docks • 31
men who wanted to work on a given day had been of-
fered jobs. The expectation was that those who did not 
work frequently would find other careers, leaving a cadre 
of better- paid workers with fairly regular incomes.11
Thanks to the new hiring halls, longshoremen no lon-
ger needed to endure the daily humiliation of literally 
fighting for a job. But their incomes remained most un-
certain, because the demand for their services varied. In 
the most extreme case, Liverpool, stevedoring firms 
needed twice as many workers on busy days as on quiet 
ones. In London, where dockworkers did not win a pen-
sion scheme until 1960, men over the age of seventy 
commonly showed up in hopes of winning a light assign-
ment. Even where government schemes provided pay -
ments to dockers who were unable to find work, the 
payments were far lower than regular wages, and many 
dockers were ineligible. Of the non- Communist world’s 
major ports, only in Rotterdam and in Hamburg, where 
semicasual workers were guaranteed income equal to 
five shifts per week in 1948, could most dockers look 
forward to earning steady incomes.12
The peculiarities of dockworker life had long since 
given rise to a distinct waterfront culture. Longshoremen 
rarely worked for a single employer for long; their loy-
alty was to their colleagues, not to “the company.” Many 
believed that no one knew or cared how well they did 
their work. Their labor was arduous and often danger -
ous in ways that outsiders could not appreciate, contrib-
uting to an unusual esprit de corps. Lack of control over 
their own time interfered with dockers’ involvement in 
off- the- job activities scheduled around workers with 
regular shifts. “A longshoreman’s wife seldom knows 
32 • Chapter 2
when her husband will be working, and owing to the 
uncertain length of the workshift, she is seldom certain 
when he will be home for supper,” wrote Oregon long-
shoreman William Pilcher. And, of course, income was 
highly irregular. Most dockers earned hourly wages 
above the local average for manual labor—when they 
worked. Frequent episodes of part- day work or unem-
ployment could lead to days or weeks with little income. 
On the other hand, many dockers cherished the fact that 
their work was inherently casual. If a longshoreman 
chose not to work on any particular day, if he decided to 
go fishing rather than shaping, he was entirely within his 
rights.
13
Thanks to these particularities, one sociologist ob -
served, “More than in any other industry in a big city, it 
appears that waterfront jobs belong to particular work-
ing class communities.” Longshoremen often spent their 
entire lives near the waterfront. In Manchester, England, 
54 percent of the dockworkers hired on in the years after 
World War II lived within one mile of the docks; al -
though the houses were small and dilapidated and neigh-
borhood amenities were few, sociologists found that 
“few of the dock workers living there want to move 
away.” In Fremantle, Western Australia, half the dock -
workers in the 1950s lived within two miles of the docks. 
In South Brooklyn, a heavily Italian neighborhood ad -
joining the Brooklyn docks, one in five workers in 1960 
was either a trucker or a longshoreman.
14
As often as not, dockworkers had fathers, sons, broth-
ers, uncles, and cousins on the docks as well, and they 
frequently lived nearby. Strangers, including men of dif-
ferent ethnic groups, were unwelcome. In London and 
Gridlock on the Docks • 33
Liverpool, the Irish ruled the docks, and non- white im-
migrants from the West Indies or Africa had no chance 
of finding employment. In the American South, where 
about three- quarters of all longshoremen were black, 
white and black dockworkers belonged to separate 
union locals and often worked separate ships; the main 
exception, an unusual alliance in New Orleans that had 
an equal number of black and white longshoremen 
working every hatch of every ship, had collapsed under 
intense employer pressure in 1923. In Boston, the Irish- 
controlled Longshoremen’s Union made no effort to sign 
up blacks even after many were hired as strikebreakers 
in 1929. The International Longshoremen’s Association 
(ILA) in New York had locals that were identifiably Irish, 
Italian, and black in practice, if not by rule, and Balti -
more had separate locals for black longshoremen and 
whites. Although the International Longshoremen’s and 
Warehousemen’s Union (ILWU) in the West barred dis-
crimination on the basis of race, its locals in Portland 
and Los Angeles were almost lily- white into the early 
1960s; the Portland local even called off its efforts to 
represent a group of grain handlers when it was discov-
ered that some of them were black.
15
Even where race and ethnicity were not major issues, 
longshore unions openly discriminated against outsiders 
in order to be able to offer jobs to members’ kin. The 
work was strenuous and uncomfortable, but it paid bet-
ter than anything else readily available to a blue- collar 
worker who had not finished high school. In dockworker 
families, taking a sixteen- year- old son to shape- up and 
calling in a favor to get him hired on was a rite of pas-
sage. Among Portland longshoremen, the most common 
34 • Chapter 2
paternal occupation was longshoreman. In Antwerp, 58 
percent of dockworkers were the sons of dockworkers. 
The ratio in Manchester was three- quarters, and many 
of the rest had entered the docks with the help of their 
in- laws after marrying dockworkers’ daughters. In Edin-
burgh in the mid- 1950s, recalled longshoreman Ed die 
Trotter, “There wis nobody at all, other than a son, 
grandson, or a nephew or a brother o’ a docker got a 
job as a docker.” British prime minister Harold Mac mil-
lan, confronted with yet another strike threat, opined in 
1962, “The dockers are such difficult people, just the 
fathers and the sons, the uncles and nephews. So like  
the House of Lords, hereditary and no intelligence 
required.”16
Harsh working conditions, economic uncertainty, and 
the insularity of docker life gave rise to unique mores. 
Dockworkers saw themselves as tough, independent men 
doing a very tough job. William Pilcher, studying long-
shoremen while working as one, found that his col -
leagues cherished and cultivated reputations as drinkers 
and brawlers. “They like to see themselves as rough- and- 
ready individuals, and that is the image that they present 
to outsiders and to one another,” Pilcher observed. That 
self- image was also the public’s image. A British survey 
published in 1950 placed dockers twenty- ninth among 
thirty professions in status, above only road- sweepers, at 
a time when dockers earned more than the average na-
tional wage. That judgment was the same among both 
men and women and among people of all social classes. 
Being a longshoreman meant belonging to a global fra-
ternity of men with a common outlook on life and a 
common sense of exclusion from the mainstream.17
Gridlock on the Docks • 35
Labor militancy was a natural outgrowth of the dock-
workers’ situation. Longshoremen around the world 
fully understood that their well- being depended on col-
lective action, because otherwise the large supply of men 
desperate to do manual labor would force wages to near- 
starvation levels. Their employers, in most cases, were 
not ship lines and terminal operators with assets and 
reputations to protect, but contractors hired to service a 
particular dock or ship. This system allowed shipowners 
to evade responsibility for working conditions by claim-
ing that not they but their contractors were in charge of 
dock labor. The lack of central authority on the manage-
ment side was frequently mirrored on the union side. 
With no routine methods of resolving employment dis-
putes, and with competing unions trying to prove their 
aggressiveness but often unable to impose settlements on 
their own members, strikes were frequent. A single griev-
ance could bring an entire port to a standstill. An eleven- 
nation study found that dockworkers, along with miners 
and seafarers, lost more workdays to labor disputes than 
any other professions. In Britain alone, dock strikes re-
sulted in the loss of nearly 1 million man- days of labor 
from 1948 through 1951 and another 1.3 million in 
1954. Dockworkers proudly represented the leading 
edge of labor radicalism.18
Solidarity was strengthened by the lessons of history. 
Longshore unions’ power had waxed and waned in in-
dustrialized countries since the middle of the nineteenth 
century, and periods of union weakness inevitably 
brought heavier workloads and lower wages. After de -
feating a tumultuous strike in 1928, Australian dock op-
erators slashed weekend pay and began hiring for half- 
36 • Chapter 2
day shifts, eliminating the single shift that had been a key 
union achievement. Across the United States, where the 
right to collective bargaining was not secured in law, 
shipping and stevedoring companies set out to break 
dock unions in the years after World War I and largely 
succeeded. Longshore wages in New Orleans fell from 
eighty cents an hour to forty cents after employers de -
feated the unions in 1923. West Coast employers rousted 
longshore unions in every port from Seattle to San Diego 
between 1919 and 1924 and then imposed lower wages 
and higher workloads. Demands for double shifts were 
common, and some ports tried to speed up loading by 
putting workers on piecework rather than hourly pay. 
After employers crushed the unions in Marseilles in 
1950, “it was a job with no rules,” remembered French 
docker Alfred Pacini. Nothing speaks more eloquently to 
the traditional status of longshoremen than Edinburgh 
dockers’ recollection of the greatest improvement after 
creation of the National Dock Labour Board in 1947: 
construction of an “amenity block” with individual lock-
ers and showers, neither of which private employers had 
ever seen fit to provide.
19
This history of antagonistic labor- management rela-
tions gave rise to two problems that plagued the shipping 
industry around the world. One was theft. Theft had 
always been a problem on the waterfront, and the growth 
of trade in higher- value products after World War II 
caused it to reach epidemic proportions. Some long -
shoremen justified thievery as a response to deteriorating 
economic conditions, but it remained a problem even 
where union contracts or government intervention had 
led to better wages: a British joke from the 1960s con-
Gridlock on the Docks • 37
cerned a docker who was caught stealing a bar of gold 
and punished by having its value deducted from his next 
pay. “It wis the pilferin’ that upset me,” recalled a Scot-
tish longshoreman of the 1950s. “It was terrible, terrible, 
terrible.” Longshoremen prided themselves on such ar -
cane skills as the ability to tap whiskey from a sealed 
cask supposedly stowed safely in a ship’s hold. In Port-
land, small objects such as transistor radios and bottled 
liquor were usually stolen for personal use by family and 
friends, but not for sale. No such limits were observed in 
New York, where crime was rampant. Grace Line dis -
covered that even sixty- kilo burlap bags of coffee beans 
were not immune from theft; the company purchased a 
sealed scale, protected against tampering by checkers 
who were aiding theft rings, to confirm the number of 
bags aboard trucks leaving the pier.20
The second problem arising from dockworkers’ in -
tense suspicion of employers was resistance to anything 
that might eliminate jobs. Wherever they secured a foot-
hold, dock unions insisted on contract language to pro-
tect against a long history of employer abuses. The num-
ber of men needed to work a hatch, the placement of 
those men in the hold or on the dock, the maximum 
weight of a sling, the equipment they would use, and 
countless other details related to manning filled page 
after page in collective bargaining agreements. Shipping 
interests in Liverpool tried repeatedly to eliminate a 
practice known as the welt, under which half of each 
longshore gang left the docks, often for a nearby pub, 
while the other half worked; after an hour or two, the 
absentees would return and those who had been working 
would take a prolonged break. Ports the world over had 
38 • Chapter 2
seen strikes over employer efforts to alter work practices. 
In Los Angeles, labor productivity dropped 75 percent 
between 1928 and 1954 as union and management 
struggled over mechanization; West Coast ports han -
dled 9 percent less cargo per work- hour in 1954 than in 
1952. The Port of New York needed 1.9 man- hours to 
handle a ton of cargo in 1950, but 2.5 by 1956. In Brit-
ain, tonnage per man- year was nearly flat from 1948 to 
1952, leaped by one- third thanks to a surge of cargo in 
1953, and then sank again under the weight of stringent 
work rules.
21
The solution to the high cost of freight handling was 
obvious: instead of loading, unloading, shifting, and re-
loading thousands of loose items, why not put the freight 
into big boxes and just move the boxes?
The concept of shipping freight in large boxes had 
been around for decades. The British and French rail -
ways tried wooden containers to move household furni-
ture in the late nineteenth century, using cranes to trans-
fer the boxes from rail flatcars to horse carts. At the end 
of World War I, almost as soon as motorized trucks came 
into wide civilian use, the Cincinnati Motor Terminals 
Company hit upon the idea of interchangeable truck 
bodies that were lifted onto and off of wheels with a 
crane. Farsighted thinkers were already proposing “a 
standardized unit container in the form of a demount-
able closed auto- truck body, which can be readily trans-
ferred by cranes between railroad flat cars, auto chassis, 
warehouse floors and vessels.” The first American rail -
road to adopt the idea was the New York Central, which 
around 1920 introduced steel containers that fit side  
Gridlock on the Docks • 39
by side, six abreast, on shallow- bottomed railcars with 
dropdown sides.22
The mighty Pennsylvania Railroad, the nation’s larg-
est transportation company, became a powerful propo-
nent of this new idea. The Pennsylvania’s problem was 
that many of its customers did not generate a large 
amount of freight for a single destination. A small fac -
tory, for instance, might hold a boxcar on its siding for 
a week while filling it with goods for many different buy-
ers. The railroad would have to attach this car to a freight 
train and haul it to its nearest interchange point, where 
the contents would be removed from the car, sorted into 
hand trucks, and reloaded into other boxcars headed to-
ward different destinations. The Pennsy’s alternative was 
a steel container just over nine feet wide, perhaps one- 
sixth the size of the average boxcar. The shipper might 
fill one of these containers with freight for Detroit, an-
other for Chicago, another for St. Louis. The containers 
could be placed on a railcar by forklift, and at the inter-
change point, a forklift would simply move the contain-
ers to the proper connecting trains. Sorting loose freight 
at the transfer station cost 85 cents per ton, by the rail-
road’s reckoning; transferring a five- ton container cost 
only 4 cents per ton, and also reduced damage claims 
and the need for boxcars.23
Some railroads sought to take advantage of the con-
tainer not simply by lowering rates, but also by changing 
the way they charged shippers. Since the onset of federal 
regulation in the 1880s, the Interstate Commerce Com-
mission (ICC) had held firm to the principle that each 
commodity required its own rate, which of course was 
subject to ICC approval. With containers, though, the 
40 • Chapter 2
railroads were not handling commodities; the size and 
loaded weight of the container mattered far more than 
the contents. For the first time, they offered purely 
weight- based rates: the North Shore Line, running be -
tween Chicago and Milwaukee, charged 40 cents per 
100 pounds to carry a 3- ton container, but only 20 cents 
per 100 pounds to carry a 10- ton container, with no ad-
justment at all for what might be inside. After four 
months of hearings in 1931, the commission ruled 
weight- based rates illegal. Although it found the con -
tainer to be “a commendable piece of equipment,” the 
commission said that the railroads could not charge less 
to carry a container than to carry the equivalent weight 
of the most expensive commodity inside the container. 
With that ruling, containers no longer made economic 
sense on the rails.24
Different container systems came into use on railways 
in other countries during the 1920s in response to a new 
competitive threat—the truck. Although long- distance 
truck transportation over primitive and often unpaved 
roads was impractical, trucks had obvious advantages 
for shorter hauls, and the railroads sought ways to re -
duce the truckers’ cost advantage. In Australia, the Sun-
shine Biscuit Company used containers plastered with its 
advertising to ship its treats on open railcars with sides 
of wooden slats. The London, Midland, and Scottish 
Railway carried three thousand containers in 1927, and 
the French National Railway promoted them as an effi-
cient way for farmers to ship meat and cheese to the city. 
In 1933, it joined other railroads to form the Interna -
tional Container Bureau, an organization dedicated to 
making international container freight practical in Eu -
Gridlock on the Docks • 41
rope. Several U.S. and Canadian coastal ship lines tried 
carrying containers and truck trailers in the early 1930s, 
and Grace Line built wooden vans with metal reinforc-
ing to cut pilferage of shipments between New York and 
Venezuela. The Central of Georgia Railroad formed 
Ocean Shipping Company to move loaded railroad cars 
between Savannah and New York—an idea that allowed 
the Central of Georgia to keep control of its freight, 
rather than handing it off to another railroad.25
Experimentation began anew after the war. Amphibi-
ous landing ships were recycled as “roll on–roll off” ves-
sels to transport trucks along the coast, improving on 
techniques originally developed to land troops and tanks 
in over- the- beach invasions. The International Container 
Bureau was reestablished in 1948, and the U.S. military 
began using small steel containers, called Conex boxes, 
for soldiers’ personal belongings. The first ships designed 
for containers arrived in 1951 when Denmark’s United 
Shipping Company opened a container service to move 
beer and foodstuffs among Danish ports. Dravo Corpo-
ration of Pittsburgh created the Transportainer, a steel 
box seven feet nine inches long, and more than three 
thousand were in use around the world by 1954. The 
Missouri Pacific Railroad promoted its “speedboxes,” 
aluminum containers on wheels, in 1951, and the Alaska 
Steamship Company began carrying both wood and 
steel containers from Seattle to Alaskan ports in 1953. 
The White Pass and Yukon Route Railroad built a spe-
cialized containership in 1955 to carry small containers 
between Vancouver, British Columbia, and Skagway, 
Alaska, where they were loaded aboard trains for the 
110- mile journey to Whitehorse, in Canada’s Yukon Ter-
42 • Chapter 2
ritory. Seatrain Lines, a ship line, approached container-
ization in a different way, hoisting entire railcars on 
board ships and sailing them from U.S. ports to Cuba. 
All of these undertakings were modest in scope, but all 
had the same aim: to cut the cost of moving cargo 
through slow and inefficient ports.26
Yet these efforts were far from successful. “Contrary to 
what had been thought at first, the handling of containers 
led to hardly any cost savings,” an influential European 
maritime expert admitted. A 1955 census found 154,907 
shipping containers in use in non- Communist Europe. 
The number is large, but the containers were not: fully 52 
percent of them were smaller than 106 cubic feet, less 
than the volume of a box 5 feet on a side. Almost all Eu-
ropean containers were made of wood, and many had no 
tops; the user piled the goods inside and covered the load 
with canvas—hardly an efficient system for moving 
freight. The containers promoted by the Belgian national 
railway were meant to be slid up a ramp to fit inside truck 
bodies, requiring an extra stage of handling. American 
containers were typically made of steel, providing better 
protection but at enormous cost; one- quarter or more of 
the weight of a loaded container was the container 
itself.27
All over the world, the main methods for handling 
containers in the years after World War II offered few 
advantages over loose freight. “Cargo containers have 
been more of a hindrance than a help,” a leading steam-
ship executive complained in 1955. Many containers 
had metal eyes on top of each corner, requiring long -
shoremen to climb atop them to attach hooks before 
they could be lifted. The lack of weight limits meant that 
Gridlock on the Docks • 43
lifting could prove dangerous. Moving them with fork-
lifts instead of winches, though, often damaged the con-
tainers. Large, expensive longshore gangs were still re -
quired to stow containers alongside loose freight in the 
holds of ships, where the boxes had to be maneuvered 
past built- in posts and ladders. “It is certain that the 
goods would occupy far less space if they were stowed 
individually instead of in containers,” the head of the 
French stevedores’ association acknowledged in 1954. 
“This wasted space is quite considerable—probably 
over 10%.” Ten percent of the ship’s volume sailing 
empty amounted to a huge penalty for carrying cargo in 
containers.
For international shipments, customs authorities often 
charged duties on the container as well as the contents. 
And then there was the cost of sending emptied boxes 
back where they had come from, which “has always 
been a heavy handicap to container transport,” Jean 
Levy, director of the French National Railway, admitted 
in 1948. Shipping food from a depot in Pennsylvania to 
an air base in Labrador cost 10 percent more using con-
tainers than with conventional methods, a 1956 study 
found—if the container was left in Labrador. When the 
cost of returning it empty to Pennsylvania was figured 
in, container shipping was 75 percent more expensive 
than loose freight.28
By the early 1950s, there was little dispute that freight 
terminals were a transportation choke point. An unusual 
government- sponsored study, conducted in 1954, laid 
bare just how backward cargo handling was. The subject 
was the Warrior, a fairly typical C- 2- type cargo ship, 
owned by Waterman Steamship Corp. The ship was 
44 • Chapter 2
chartered to the U.S. military, but on its run from Brook-
lyn to Bremerhaven, Germany, in March 1954, it carried 
a mix of cargo typical of merchant vessels, and was 
loaded and unloaded by civilian longshoremen. With 
government consent, the researchers had access to un -
usually detailed information about the cargo and the 
voyage (see table 2).
The Warrior was loaded with 5,015 long tons of 
cargo, mainly food, merchandise for sale in post ex -
changes, household goods, mail, and parts for machines 
Table 2. Cargo Aboard the Warrior
Number of Pieces Percent of Weight
Case 74,903 27.9%
Carton 71,726 27.6%
Bag 24,036 12.9%
Box 10,671 12.8%
Bundle 2,880 1.0%
Package 2,877 1.9%
Piece 2,634 1.8%
Drum 1,538 3.5%
Can 888 0.3%
Barrel 815 0.3%
Wheeled vehicles 53 6.7%
Crate 21 0.3%
Transporter 10 0.5%
Reel 5 0.1%
Undetermined 1,525 0.8%
Total 194,582 98.4%
Source: U.S. National Research Council, Maritime Cargo Transportation Confer-
ence, The SS Warrior, p. 8.
Gridlock on the Docks • 45
and vehicles. It also carried 53 vehicles. The cargo com-
prised an astonishing 194,582 individual items of every 
size and description.
These goods arrived in Brooklyn in 1,156 separate 
shipments from 151 different U.S. cities, with the first 
shipment arriving at the dock more than a month before 
the vessel sailed. Each item was placed on a pallet prior 
to storage in the transit shed. Longshoremen loaded the 
ship by lowering the pallets into the hold, where the men 
physically removed each item from its pallet and stowed 
it, using $5,031.69 worth of lumber and rope to hold 
everything in place. The longshoremen worked one 
eight- hour shift per day, excluding Sunday, and required 
6 calendar days (including a day lost to a strike) to load 
the ship. Steaming across the Atlantic took 10½ days, 
and unloading at the German end, where longshoremen 
worked around the clock, took 4 days. In sum, the ship 
spent half the total duration of the voyage docked in 
port. The last of its cargo arrived at its ultimate destina-
tion 33 days after the Warrior docked at Bremerhaven, 
44 days after it departed New York, and 95 days after 
the first Europe- bound cargo was dispatched from its 
U.S. point of origin.
The total cost of moving the goods carried by the War-
rior came to $237,577, not counting the cost of the ves-
sel’s return to New York or interest on the inventory 
while in transit. Of that amount, the sea voyage itself 
accounted for only 11.5 percent. Cargo handling at both 
ends of the voyage accounted for 36.8 percent of the 
outlay. This was less than the 50 percent or more often 
cited by shipping executives—but only because Germa-
ny’s “economic miracle” had yet to drive up longshore 
46 • Chapter 2
wages; the authors noted that port costs would have 
been much higher were it not for the fact that German 
longshoremen earned less than one- fifth the wages of 
U.S. longshoremen. Their conclusion was that reducing 
the costs of receiving, storing, and loading the outbound 
cargo in the U.S. port offered the best method of reduc-
ing the total cost of shipping. The authors went beyond 
the normal admonitions to improve longshoremen’s pro-
ductivity and eliminate inefficient work rules, and urged 
a fundamental rethinking of the entire process. “Perhaps 
the remedy lies in discovering ways of packaging, mov-
ing and stowing cargo in such a manner that breakbulk 
is avoided,” they wrote.
29
Interest in such a remedy was widespread. Shippers 
wanted cheaper transport, less pilferage, less damage, 
and lower insurance rates. Shipowners wanted to build 
bigger vessels, but only if they could spend more time at 
sea, earning revenue, and less time in port. Truckers 
wanted to be able to deliver to and pick up from the 
docks without hour upon hour of waiting. Business in-
terests in port cities were praying for almost anything 
that would boost traffic through their harbors. Yet de-
spite all the demands for change, and despite much ex-
perimentation, most of the industry’s efforts to improve 
productivity centered on such timeworn ideas as making 
drafts heavier so that longshoremen would have to work 
harder. No one had found a better way to ease the grid-
lock on the docks. The solution came from an outsider 
who had no experience with ships.
30
CHAPTER 3
The Trucker
The U.S. economy boomed in the years just after World 
War II. The maritime industry did not. The entire mer -
chant fleet had been commandeered by the government 
when the United States entered the war, and many ships 
did not revert to private control until July 1947, almost 
two years after the war ended. Coastal shipping had been 
all but closed down after German submarines sank sev-
eral ships, and after 1945 coastwise traffic remained well 
below prewar levels. Trucks grabbed market share in do-
mestic transportation, but the need to spend days pains-
takingly handling cargo each time a ship steamed into 
port kept the maritime industry from reducing costs 
enough to compete. “Until cargo handling costs can be 
reduced, there is little hope for coastwise revival,” warned 
a California State Senate committee in 1951.1
Yet while the larger American ship lines were not par-
ticularly profitable, they were relatively sheltered. For -
eign lines were barred from coastal service and routes to 
island territories, and a new American- owned competi-
tor could not enter a domestic route without proving to 
the ICC that its entry would not harm other ship lines. 
Competition was also limited on international routes, 
48 • Chapter 3
where almost all ship lines belonged to cartels, known as 
conferences, that set uniform rates for each commodity. 
The U.S.- flag international lines received government 
subsidies to cover the higher wages of American crews, 
and both domestic and international lines—for regula -
tory reasons, international services were run by separate 
companies—had access to war- surplus ships. Inefficient 
though it was, the maritime industry thus felt little im-
mediate pressure for change. Reshaping the business of 
shipping was left to an outsider with no maritime experi-
ence whatsoever, a self- made trucking magnate named 
Malcom Purcell McLean.
McLean was born in 1913 near the tiny town of Max-
ton, deep in the swamp country of southeastern North 
Carolina. Maxton, once called Shoe Heel, had been pop-
ulated by Scottish Highlanders in the late eighteenth cen-
tury. The local newspaper was the Scottish Chief, and 
local lore had it that Shoe Heel was renamed Maxton 
when a rail passenger shouted, “Hello, Mac!” from a 
train window and ten men responded. At the time of 
McLean’s birth, Maxton Township, with about thirty- 
five hundred residents, was very rural and very poor. 
Electric lighting had arrived in Robeson County only in 
1901. The town of Maxton, with about thirteen hundred 
inhabitants, had telephone service, but the surrounding 
area did not; as late as 1907, residents of Lumberton, the 
county’s largest town, had to ride the train to Maxton to 
make long- distance calls.
2
In later years, McLean took to portraying his life as a 
Horatio Alger story, in which his mother taught him 
business by giving him eggs to sell, on commission, from 
a crate at the side of the road. The reality was not quite 
The Trucker • 49
so harsh. Although the family was far from wealthy, it 
was not without resources. McLean’s father, also Mal-
colm P. McLean,* was “a member of a prominent and 
widely connected family,” according to an obituary pub-
lished in 1942. An 1884 county map shows half a dozen 
McLeans farming near Shoe Heel, and several other 
McLeans farmed or practiced law in Lumberton. Angus 
Wilton McLean, probably a cousin—his mother, like 
Malcom’s, was a Purcell—started a bank and a railroad 
in Lumberton, served as assistant secretary of the United 
States Treasury in 1920–21, and was governor of North 
Carolina from 1925 to 1929. Family ties may have 
helped the senior McLean obtain a job as a rural mail 
carrier in 1904 to supplement his income from farming. 
Upon young Malcom’s graduation from high school in 
1931, in the depths of the Great Depression, family ties 
got him work stocking shelves at a local grocery. Those 
local connections helped once more when an oil com -
pany needed a gas station manager in the nearby town 
of Red Springs, as a family friend lent McLean the money 
to buy his first load of gasoline.3
As recounted by McLean in the American Magazine 
in 1950, his rise began when he learned that a trucker 
earned five dollars for bringing the station’s oil from Fay-
etteville, twenty- eight miles away. McLean proposed to 
do it himself. The station owner let him use an old trailer 
that had been rusting in the yard. McLean Trucking 
Company opened for business in March 1934, with Mc-
* The younger McLean was named Malcolm at birth and continued to 
spell his name that way until after 1950, when he changed the spelling to 
Malcom. To avoid confusion, he is referred to as “Malcom” throughout this 
account.
50 • Chapter 3
Lean, still running the service station, as the sole driver. 
Soon after, family ties helped once more when a local 
man agreed to sell McLean a used dump truck on install-
ments of three dollars a week. With the truck, McLean 
won a contract to haul dirt for the Works Progress Ad-
ministration, a federal public- works program that at one 
point employed more than eleven hundred people in 
Robeson County. Even after hiring a driver, McLean 
earned enough to buy a new truck to haul vegetables 
from local farms. According to a much repeated tale, one 
trip found McLean so poor that he couldn’t afford to pay 
the toll at a bridge along the way; he left a wrench with 
the toll collector as a deposit, redeeming it after selling 
his load in New York.
4
This rags- to- riches tale fails to do justice to McLean’s 
immense ambition. By 1935, at twenty- two years of age 
and with just one year of experience as a trucker, Mc -
Lean owned 2 trucks and 1 tractor trailer, employed nine 
drivers who owned their own rigs, and had already 
hauled steel drums from North Carolina to New Jersey 
and cotton yarn to mills in New England. By 1940,  
as prepar ations for war revived the economy, six- year- 
old McLean Trucking owned 30 trucks and grossed 
$230,000. McLean built his operations during the war, 
gaining additional routes. A massive merger among 
seven of his competitors, which he opposed unsuccess -
fully all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, barely af -
fected the truck line. At the war’s end in 1945, Malcom 
McLean controlled a thriving business with 162 trucks, 
mainly hauling textiles and cigarettes from North Caro-
lina to Philadelphia, New York, and southern New En-
gland. Revenues in 1946 were $2.2 million, nearly ten 
The Trucker • 51
times the level of 1940. McLean, already wealthy at age 
thirty- four, viewed this as just a beginning. As he wrote 
a few years later, “I saw that my only opportunity was to 
build and build and build, make a big trucking company 
out of a relatively small one.”
5
The economy of the late 1940s provided ample op -
portunity for a small trucking company to grow. As rail-
way freight volumes languished, long- distance truck 
traffic more than doubled between 1946 and 1950. Get-
ting a larger piece of the action, though, required the 
support of the Interstate Commerce Commission. The 
federal Motor Carrier Act of 1935 had brought inter -
state trucking under the authority of the ICC, which had 
regulated railroads since 1887. The ICC controlled al -
most every aspect of the business of common carriers—
truckers whose services were on offer to the public. A 
common carrier could haul only commodities the ICC 
allowed it to haul, over ICC- approved routes, at ICC- 
approved rates. If a new firm wanted to begin service, or 
if an existing one wanted to serve a new route or carry a 
new commodity, it had to hire lawyers to plead its case 
at the commission. Any major change required hearings 
at which other truck lines and railroads had the oppor -
tunity to object. Regulation made trucking hugely inef-
ficient; a trucker authorized to haul paper between 
Nashville and Philadelphia could not simply pick up a 
few tires or drums of chemicals to fill a half- empty truck, 
and might have to return home empty if authorized 
cargo were not available for the backhaul. The ICC’s 
concern was not efficiency but order. Regulation pro -
tected the interests of established truck lines by limiting 
competition, and it protected the railroads by forcing 
52 • Chapter 3
truck lines to charge much more than railroad compa -
nies. More than anything else, the ICC wanted to keep 
the transportation industry stable.6
Regulation damped competitive spirit in the trucking 
industry. Showing the sort of ingenuity that would char-
acterize his career, McLean found ways around the regu-
lators’ obstacles. If winning new route authority was too 
arduous, why not buy a carrier that already had attrac-
tive routes? And if buying another truck line was too 
expensive, why not lease one? The labor unrest that fol-
lowed the war left many truck lines struggling, and Mc-
Lean repeatedly seized opportunities. Between 1946 and 
1954, McLean Trucking bought or leased routes in at 
least ten different transactions, expanding its network 
from Atlanta to Boston. The company added six hun -
dred trucks between 1947 and 1949, using the U.S. gov-
ernment as the unwitting financier: veterans were eligible 
for cheap government loans to set themselves up as in-
dependent truckers, so McLean encouraged veterans to 
become owner- operators, brought them together to pur-
chase equipment in a single large order, and signed them 
up to haul freight for McLean Trucking.
7
An obsessive focus on cutting costs was the key to 
McLean Trucking’s success. The only way a truck line 
could attract much new business was by offering lower 
rates than competitors offered. A trucking company’s 
salesman would call on a prospective client, learn how 
much cargo it generated for various destinations, and 
then study the rates that its current carrier had filed with 
the ICC. The truck line could then propose a lower rate 
to win the business, but only if it could prove to the ICC 
that the proposed rate would be profitable. In practice, 
The Trucker • 53
this meant that a truck line could not underprice its com-
petitors unless it had lower costs. Malcom McLean’s 
sharp pencil was critical. In 1946, for example, McLean 
made a deal to lease the routes of Atlantic States Motor 
Lines, which had been closed down by a strike. Among 
its other attractions, Atlantic States was entitled to use 
highways that let McLean Trucking shave seventy miles 
off runs between North Carolina and the Northeast. The 
shorter trip meant fewer driver hours and therefore 
lower rates. By purchasing route authority from Garford 
Trucking in 1948, McLean Trucking gained southbound 
cargo from New England, so that trucks that hauled 
cigarettes north would not have to return empty—which 
meant that the company could charge less for the north-
bound trip.
8
One hotly contested rate case illustrates McLean’s 
handle on costs. In March 1947, McLean Trucking pro-
posed to cut certain rates for cigarettes almost by half, 
charging $0.68 per hundred pounds to haul full truck-
loads from Durham, North Carolina, to Atlanta, and 
$1.10 to carry partial truckloads. At the time, other truck 
lines were charging $1.34 for full truckloads and $1.70 
per hundred pounds for partial loads. McLean even 
wanted to underprice the much slower railroads, which 
protested the proposed rates as “unfair and destructive.” 
Laying out its costs in great detail, McLean Trucking 
argued that tobacco products were cheaper to transport 
than other commodities because its administrative costs 
for cigarettes were 1.02 cents per vehicle- mile below its 
average for all freight, its sales and marketing costs 50 to 
60 percent less, and its terminal costs 3 cents per vehicle- 
mile less than for full truckloads of other freight. After 
54 • Chapter 3
weighing such considerations as the density of tobacco 
products and McLean Trucking’s insurance claims expe-
rience on cigarette shipments, the ICC rejected the pro-
posed rate for partial truckloads but found the proposed 
full- truckload rate to be “just and reasonable,” opening 
the way for McLean Trucking to vastly expand its busi-
ness with the tobacco industry.
9
Cost- saving innovations continually materialized as 
McLean Trucking grew. The company opened one of the 
earliest automated terminals in the industry, in Winston- 
Salem, North Carolina, using conveyors to transfer 
freight from one truck to another while saving labor. At 
a time when most trucks had gasoline engines, McLean 
Trucking was the first major company to install diesel 
engines in its tractors—and in an era when drivers typi-
cally bought fuel on their own, Malcom McLean ar -
ranged a corporate discount at service stations along the 
company’s routes and told drivers to fuel only at those 
stations. The sides of the company’s truck trailers were 
crenellated, not smooth; Malcom McLean claimed that 
experts at the University of North Carolina had told him 
crenellation would reduce wind drag and thus fuel costs. 
By the early 1950s, McLean Trucking was hiring young 
university graduates and putting them through one of 
the first formal management training programs in Amer-
ican business. Men just out of college would come to 
Winston- Salem, where their first task was learning to 
drive a truck. After six months of hauling freight, train-
ees were sent to a terminal and spent several months 
unloading trucks. Then came a stint in the office, learn-
ing the McLean Trucking method for making a proposal 
to a potential customer, which required careful analysis 
The Trucker • 55
of the cost of serving the business. Only then were train-
ees dispatched to their first assignments, usually selling 
freight in Raleigh or Boston or Philadelphia.
10
McLean Trucking quickly became known as a dy -
namic company in a very stodgy industry. By 1954, it 
had become one of the largest trucking companies in 
America, ranking eighth in revenue and third among all 
truck lines in after- tax profit. Assets, $728,197 in 1946, 
increased to $11.4 million in 1954 as the McLean fleet 
grew to 617 company- owned trucks. The only way to 
grow so fast was to borrow money. McLean Trucking’s 
$200,000 of long- term debt in 1946 increased 31- fold to 
$6.2 million by 1951 as the company ordered more and 
more trucks. “He was a highly leveraged fellow,” remem-
bered Walter Wriston, who started lending to McLean on 
behalf of National City Bank in 1954 and later headed 
the company when, under the name Citibank, it became 
the largest bank in the world. “He understood cash flow. 
You’d go to a railroad in those days and talk about cash 
flow and they’d ask you what you meant.”
11
Heavy indebtedness, of course, was risky. Any slow -
down in revenue growth could make it hard to service 
debt. Of necessity, a highly leveraged company had to 
focus on efficiency, for which Malcom McLean and his 
brother Jim, who ran day- to- day operations, had a pas-
sion. They knew every aspect of their business, and they 
knew how to squeeze out costs. Recalls one former em-
ployee, “When you reported for duty, you drove the 
truck through the gatehouse, you were weighed, and the 
truck was sealed. They started the tachometer, and you 
were given specific directions: ‘You will proceed up 
Route 3A to Secondi’s filling station, then you will pro-
56 • Chapter 3
ceed . . .’ You didn’t have any discretion at all.” But after 
years behind the wheel themselves, the McLeans under-
stood that the easiest way to control costs was to get 
employees involved. Holding down insurance and repair 
bills, for example, meant having safety- conscious driv -
ers. Novices were trained by being paired with senior 
drivers on the run from Winston- Salem to Atlanta. The 
senior driver got a bonus of one month’s pay if a man he 
had trained made it through his first year without an ac-
cident. The incentives were powerful: the veteran had a 
strong financial incentive to train the newcomer well, 
and the new driver understood that he had best drive 
very carefully if he wanted to stick around.12
Malcom McLean was not a man to sit and enjoy his suc-
cess. The civic and philanthropic involvements common 
to successful businesspeople did not interest him. He was 
a restless soul, competitive, calculating, always thinking 
about business. “He wouldn’t be able to sit still five min-
utes,” a longtime colleague recalled before McLean’s 
death. “You’d either have to play gin rummy with him 
or discuss business with him. Can’t go quail hunting with 
Malcom without him betting on the first, the most, the 
biggest.” His inventive brain churned out idea after idea 
for making money.
13
One such brainstorm came in 1953, as McLean was 
fretting over increasing highway congestion and worry-
ing that domestic ship lines, able to buy war- surplus 
cargo ships from the government for almost nothing, 
might undercut his trucking business. Rather than driv-
ing down crowded coastal highways, why not just put 
truck trailers on ships that could ferry them up and down 
The Trucker • 57
the coast? By the end of that year, McLean was propos-
ing to build waterfront terminals that would allow trucks 
to drive up ramps to deposit their trailers on board spe-
cially designed ships. The ships would move the trailers 
between North Carolina, New York City, and Rhode 
Island, circumventing the worsening traffic jams at a 
time when expressways were few and far between. At the 
port of arrival, other trucks would collect the trailers and 
haul them to their destinations.14
In the context of the 1950s, McLean’s plan was revo-
lutionary. Law and regulation ensured that trucks and 
ships had nothing in common: trucking companies ran 
trucks, and shipping companies ran ships. A few ship 
lines and barge companies carried trucks on their vessels, 
as McLean planned to do, but they were simply offering 
water transportation to any trucker who would pay. The 
idea that a truck line would use its own trucks to drive 
its own trailers on board its own ships, float the trailers 
down the coast, and then drive them to their destination 
at the other end violated the ICC’s basic precepts. The 
truck- ship plan was startling as well because coastwise 
shipping was widely seen as a dying business. New York’s 
docks were handling only half as much domestic cargo 
in the early 1950s as they had in the depressed 1930s. 
No one had invested significant money in coastal ship-
ping in thirty years. McLean’s interest was entirely a 
matter of cost. The ICC had regulatory authority over 
domestic shipping, and it allowed ship rates to be well 
below rail and truck rates to compensate for slower ser-
vice. Sending his trucks by water would let McLean un-
derprice other truckers running between North Carolina 
and the Northeast.
58 • Chapter 3
Late in 1953, a real estate firm working on McLean 
Trucking’s behalf began looking for terminal sites. The 
timing could not have been better. The Port of New York 
Authority, an agency set up by the states of New York 
and New Jersey, was eager to expand its tenuous foot-
hold in the port business. It had taken charge of the 
money- losing docks in Newark, New Jersey, in 1947, 
and it was eager to draw new business to what had been 
a sleepy lumber port. As it happened, the port at New-
ark, across the harbor from New York City, was uniquely 
positioned to serve McLean Trucking’s needs. There was 
plenty of space to marshal trucks and easy access to the 
New Jersey Turnpike, which had opened in 1951. Even 
better, from McLean’s point of view, the Port Authority 
had the power to issue revenue bonds; it could build the 
terminal and lease it to McLean Trucking, reducing the 
need for the company to raise funds. The Port Authority 
was so taken with McLean’s concept that Austin Tobin, 
its executive director, and A. Lyle King, the director of 
marine terminals, became early and very public apostles 
of transporting truck trailers by train and ship.
15
While the Port Authority prepared McLean Trucking’s 
new waterfront terminal, Malcom McLean’s own ideas 
were evolving. His 1953 proposal had involved buying 
S. C. Loveland, a small barge operator, in order to gain 
its coastal operating rights. Now, he was thinking bigger. 
In 1954, while still pursuing Loveland, he came upon the 
Waterman Steamship Corporation in the pages of a 
Moody’s financial manual. Waterman, based in Mobile, 
Alabama, was a large, well- established operator sailing 
to Europe and Asia. Its tiny subsidiary Pan- Atlantic 
Steamship Corporation operated four ships along the 
The Trucker • 59
coast between Boston and Houston. McLean immedi -
ately spotted the companies’ attractions. Pan- Atlantic 
had been hurt badly by the 1954 longshore strike in New 
York, completing only 64 voyages the entire year, but it 
owned valuable operating rights to serve 16 ports. Its 
parent, Waterman Steamship, was debt- free, with assets 
including 37 ships and $20 million in cash. McLean 
made some preliminary soundings and found that Water-
man could be bought for $42 million.16
What followed was an unprecedented piece of finan-
cial and legal engineering. First, to circumvent rules re-
quiring ICC approval for a truck line to own a ship line, 
McLean created an entirely new company, McLean In-
dustries, in January 1955. Although McLean Industries 
had publicly traded stock, it was clearly a family- 
controlled business; Malcom McLean was president, his 
brother James McLean was vice president, and his sister 
Clara McLean was secretary and assistant treasurer. 
Malcom, James, and Clara then put control of the truck-
ing company in a trust, of which they were the beneficia-
ries. Malcom McLean kept $5 million of stock, but the 
trustees were authorized to sell the rest. As soon as the 
trust documents were signed, the McLeans resigned as 
directors of McLean Trucking, and within an hour Mc-
Lean Industries took control of Pan- Atlantic. The coun-
try’s best- known trucking magnate walked away from 
the business he had built in order to build a new one, 
based on some untested ideas about shipping.17
Several railroads protested the transaction, claiming 
that the McLeans were effectively controlling both Mc -
Lean Trucking and the ship line in violation of the law. 
The ICC eventually agreed but noted that “the proce-
60 • Chapter 3
dure followed was on the advice of counsel, and was 
not a deliberate violation of the act.” In any case, in 
September 1955 the trustees sold off McLean Truck -
ing’s stock, making the legal issues moot. Malcom Mc-
Lean did not fare badly in the process. He cleared $14 
million on the sale of McLean Trucking. His net worth 
in 1955 was $25 million—the equivalent of $220 mil -
lion in 2015 dollars. Asked later whether he had con -
sidered ways to shelter some of his wealth from the 
risks of entering the maritime business, his answer was 
an unequivocal “No.” McLean explained: “You’ve got 
to be totally committed.”
18
Pan- Atlantic was just an appetizer. In May 1955, Mc-
Lean Industries bid for Waterman itself. McLean and his 
bankers concocted a hugely complex financial transac-
tion. McLean Industries would pay Waterman $75,000 
to cease all domestic service and surrender its ICC oper-
ating certificate in an attempt to eliminate the ICC’s ju-
risdiction over the purchase. Then, McLean Industries 
would borrow $42 million from National City Bank, an 
amount approaching the bank’s legal limit for a single 
loan. McLean Industries would raise additional money 
through a $7 million issue of preferred stock. When the 
deal closed, Waterman’s $20 million of cash and various 
other assets would be used to repay half the loan. Wris-
ton’s superiors at National City went apoplectic at the 
thought that $22 million of National City’s money would 
still be at risk. Who knew whether anyone would use 
McLean’s truck- ship service? Who would finance all the 
equipment? Would the trailers even survive a storm at 
sea? At the last minute, the bankers ordered the deal 
called off. Wriston phoned McLean at the Essex House, 
The Trucker • 61
McLean’s New York hotel, and told him, “You’d better 
get down here. Things are falling apart.” When McLean 
arrived at National City’s headquarters on Wall Street, 
Wriston advised that McLean himself would have to 
convince the bank’s top loan executives to approve the 
loan. The bankers told McLean that the loan was too 
risky and Wriston too inexperienced. “He’s just a 
trainee,” one of them said. “He may just be a trainee, but 
he’s going to be the boss of both of you pretty soon,” 
McLean shot back. As McLean remembered later, “They 
said, ‘Maybe we’ll take another look.’ ” The loan was 
approved.19
But the deal was still not done, and a competing buyer, 
also financed by National City, had grown interested in 
Waterman. To avoid any chance of a slipup, the lawyers 
decided that the entire transaction needed to be com -
pleted simultaneously. On May 6, Waterman’s board and 
McLean’s bankers and lawyers convened in a Mobile 
boardroom only to realize that the board lacked a quo-
rum. One of the Wall Street lawyers quickly took the 
elevator downstairs, stopped a passerby, and asked 
whether he wanted to earn a quick fifty dollars. The man 
was promptly elected a Waterman director, making a 
quorum. The Waterman board members then resigned 
one at a time, with each being replaced by a McLean 
nominee. The new board immediately voted to pay a $25 
million dividend to McLean Industries, and with a phone 
call the money was wired to National City. As the meet-
ing broke up, lawyers for the opposing bidder served the 
board with legal papers to prevent the transfer of the 
dividend, but the bank already had its money and Mc-
Lean had Waterman. Typical of McLean’s financial acu-
62 • Chapter 3
men, he laid out only $10,000 of his own cash to gain 
control of one of the country’s largest ship lines through 
what later became known as a leveraged buyout. “In a 
sense, Waterman was the first LBO,” Wriston recalled.
20
McLean’s prize was a formerly debt- free company 
whose bank loans and ship mortgages soared to $22.6 
million at the end of 1955, nearly ten times its $2.3 mil-
lion of after- tax income. In a step that set the norm for 
future leveraged buyouts, McLean disposed of unwanted 
Waterman assets to pay down debt; the sale of a hotel, a 
dry dock, and various other businesses raised almost $4 
million within two months of the takeover. Now heavily 
in debt, McLean began maneuvering for a government 
handout. The federal government had become interested 
in ships carrying truck trailers, and Pan- Atlantic ob -
tained $63 million in government loan guarantees for 
seven new roll on–roll off ships, designed to have trailers 
driven on board. The new ships would carry 288 truck 
trailers each and would reduce cargo- handling costs by 
more than 75 percent.
21
The money was never spent, because McLean recon -
sidered his plan. He had realized that carrying trailers 
on ships was inefficient: the wheels beneath each trailer 
would waste a lot of precious shipboard space. Ponder-
ing that problem, McLean came up with a still more 
radical idea. A government maritime- promotion pro -
gram made leftover World War II tankers available to 
ship lines very cheaply. Pan- Atlantic would buy two 
and convert them to haul truck trailer bodies —trailers 
detached from their steel beds, axles, and wheels. Sub -
tracting the frames and wheels would reduce the space 
occupied by each trailer by one- third. Even better, the 
The Trucker • 63
trailer bodies could be stacked, whereas trailers with 
wheels could not be. As McLean envisioned it, a truck 
would pull the trailer alongside the ship, where the 
trailer body, filled with twenty tons of freight, would be 
detached from its steel chassis and lifted aboard ship. 
At the other end of the voyage, the trailer body would 
be lowered onto an empty chassis and hauled to its 
destination.22
The concept was costed out on Ballantine Beer, which 
McLean Trucking hauled from Newark. Analysts for the 
Port of New York Authority calculated that sending the 
beer to Miami on board a traditional coastal ship, in -
cluding a truck trip to the port, unloading, stacking in a 
transit shed, removal from the transit shed, wrapping in 
netting, hoisting aboard ship, and stowage, would cost 
four dollars a ton, with unloading at the Miami end cost-
ing as much again. The container alternative—loading 
the beer into a container at the brewery and lifting the 
container aboard a specially designed ship—was esti -
mated to cost twenty- five cents a ton. Container shipping 
would be 94 percent cheaper than breakbulk shipping  
of the same product, even allowing for the cost of the 
container.23
Tankers, of course, were not the ideal vessels for such 
a mission, but they reduced the financial risk. If no one 
wanted to ship containers on the return trip from Hous-
ton to Newark, the vessels could still make money car -
rying oil. McLean portrayed these “lift on–lift off” ships 
as “forerunners” of the roll on–roll off ships he intended 
to build with the government guarantees, but plans for 
the trailerships were pushed to the side and finally 
abandoned.24
64 • Chapter 3
The concept that became container shipping was Mal-
com McLean’s. But in early 1955, when McLean jetti -
soned his plan to put entire truck trailers on Pan- Atlantic’s 
ships and decided instead to carry just trailer bodies, he 
could not simply buy the equipment off the shelf. Small 
steel boxes were readily available, but it was obvious that 
lowering them into the hold and stowing them amid as-
sorted bags and bales, the way other ship lines occasion-
ally did, would bring little by way of cost savings. Truck 
trailer bodies could be purchased as well, but moving 
trailers weighing tens of thousands of pounds apart from 
their chassis and wheels was by no means a routine op-
eration. McLean, impatient to build a business, de -
manded that his staff find a way to turn his concept into 
reality. In March, a Pan- Atlantic executive named George 
Kempton placed a call to Keith Tantlinger.
Tantlinger, then thirty- five, was chief engineer at 
Brown Industries in Spokane, Washington, and had al -
ready built a reputation as a container expert. Brown 
had been building truck trailers since 1932, and Tan -
tlinger’s job, along with designing trailers for trucking 
companies, involved speaking at industry meetings to 
promote Brown’s products. In 1949, he had designed 
what was probably the first modern shipping container, 
a 30- foot aluminum box that could be stacked two high 
on barges operating between Seattle and Alaska or placed 
on a chassis and pulled by a truck. The order involved 
only two hundred containers, and despite much curios-
ity, no other orders followed. “Everybody was interested, 
but nobody wanted to reach for his pocketbook,” Tant-
linger remembered.
25
The Trucker • 65
McLean the trucker had never done business with 
Brown Industries. Now that he was in the shipping busi-
ness, though, McLean wanted Tantlinger’s expertise—
immediately. The next morning, Tantlinger flew to Mo-
bile, where Pan- Atlantic was based. “I understand you 
know everything there is to know about containers,” was 
McLean’s gruff greeting. McLean explained his plan. He 
proposed to use containers thirty- three feet long, a length 
chosen because the available deck space aboard the T- 2 
tankers was divisible by thirty- three. These boxes were 
at least seven times the size of any containers then in 
common use. Rather than having longshoremen stow 
them with other cargo in a ship’s hold, he proposed to 
install metal frames, called flying decks or spardecks, 
above the tangle of pipes that covered the decks of his 
two tankers. The spardecks would hold the containers 
eight abreast. The idea was to attach six steel pieces, each 
a foot long with a small hole at the bottom, to the sides 
of each container. When the container was loaded on 
board ship, the steel pieces would slide vertically through 
slots in the frame of the spardeck, and a rod would be 
inserted through the holes, underneath the frame, to lock 
the container in place. Most important, the containers 
Pan- Atlantic planned to use would be designed to be 
shifted easily among ships, trucks, and trains.26
McLean’s trucking superintendent, Cecil Egger, had 
begun experiments with two old Fruehauf truck trailers 
that had been strengthened with A- shaped steel brackets 
welded to each side. Tantlinger quickly saw that the sys-
tem was unworkable: the containers were meant to be 
locked in placed with steel pieces protruding beneath 
66 • Chapter 3
them, making them impossible to stack, and the  A- shaped 
brackets made the trailers too wide and too tall for the 
highways. Tantlinger told McLean that standard Brown 
containers, which used the aluminum sides and roof to 
bear most of the load, would do the job. McLean or -
dered two 33- foot containers, to be delivered in two 
weeks to the Bethlehem Steel shipyard in Baltimore, 
which was altering the tankers. On the appointed day, 
Tantlinger was to meet Pan- Atlantic executives for 
breakfast at the Lord Baltimore Hotel. When they failed 
to arrive, he called the shipyard and learned that the men 
were already there. Tantlinger rushed to the shipyard, 
where Malcom and Jim McLean, Kempton, and Egger 
were jumping up and down on the roof of a container. 
Tantlinger had told Malcom McLean that the wafer- thin 
aluminum roof was strong enough to keep the container 
rigid, and the McLean group was trying, unsuccessfully, 
to disprove his claim. Sold on the merits of Brown’s con-
tainers, McLean ordered two hundred boxes and de -
manded that the reluctant Tantlinger move to Mobile to 
be his chief engineer.
Part of Tantlinger’s job was to convince the American 
Bureau of Shipping, which sets standards for maritime 
insurers, that the Ideal- X would be seaworthy when 
loaded with containers, while the U.S. Coast Guard 
wanted assurance that the containers would not endan-
ger the ship’s crew. After negotiation, the Coast Guard 
agreed to a test. Pan- Atlantic asked trucking company 
workers to load two containers with cardboard boxes 
filled with coke briquets, a cargo of average density and 
negligible cost. The boxes were lashed to the spardeck of 
one of the converted T- 2s. The ship then sailed back and 
The Trucker • 67
forth between Newark and Houston, the Coast Guard 
checking the load after each voyage, until a trip through 
heavy seas persuaded that maritime agency that loaded 
containers were safe. Photos of the test, showing the 
stacks of cardboard boxes dry and firmly in place after 
each voyage, got the Bureau of Shipping’s approval.
And then there was the matter of loading. Most cargo 
ships in the 1950s had winches that allowed them to 
load and unload in any port, but a standard shipboard 
winch could not shift a twenty- ton container without 
destabilizing the ship. The solution took the form of two 
huge revolving cranes at a disused shipyard in Chester, 
Pennsylvania. The cranes, with booms seventy- two feet 
above the dock, were designed to move on tracks in -
stalled on the dock, parallel to the ship. Pan- Atlantic dis-
mantled them, cut twenty feet out of their structures, and 
shipped them off to Newark and Houston, while port 
workers at both locations reinforced the piers to accom-
modate the added weight and installed the rails and large 
power supplies the cranes required. Hanging from the 
cranes was another money- saving piece of equipment 
newly invented by Tantlinger, a spreader bar stretching 
the entire length and width of a container. The spreader 
eliminated the need for longshoremen to climb ladders 
to the roof of each container and attach hooks dangling 
from the crane. Instead, the crane operator, sitting in a 
cab sixty feet above the dock, could lower the spreader 
over a container and engage the hooks at each corner 
with the flip of a switch. Once the box had been lifted 
and moved, another flip of the switch would disengage 
the hooks, without a worker on the ground touching the 
container.
27
68 • Chapter 3
McLean wanted to start Pan- Atlantic’s new service  
in 1955. The government did not move quite so fast.  
Not until late 1955, after months of hearings, did the 
ICC overrule objections from the railroads and autho -
rize Pan- Atlantic to carry containers between Newark 
and Houston. Delays in gaining Coast Guard approval 
pushed the start date back further. On April 26, 1956, 
one hundred dignitaries enjoyed lunch at Port Newark 
and watched the crane place a container on the Ideal- X 
every seven minutes. The ship was loaded in less than 
eight hours and set sail the same day. McLean and his 
executives flew to Houston to watch the arrival. “They 
were all waiting on Wharf II for the ship to arrive, and 
as she came up the channel, all the longshoremen and 
everybody else came over to look,” one witness recalled. 
“They were amazed to see a tanker with all these boxes 
on deck. We had seen thousands of tankers in Houston, 
but never one like this. So everybody looked at this mon-
strosity and they couldn’t believe their eyes.” For Mc -
Lean, though, the real triumph came only when the costs 
were tallied. Loading loose cargo on a medium- size cargo 
ship cost $5.83 per ton in 1956. McLean’s experts pegged 
the cost of loading the Ideal- X at 15.8 cents per ton. 
With numbers like that, the container seemed to have a 
future.
28
Pan- Atlantic’s Sea- Land Service was in business, meet-
ing a schedule of one weekly sailing in each direction 
between Newark and Houston. Pan- Atlantic itself was 
barred from owning trucks, but it contracted with truck-
ing companies to pick up shipments at customers’ load-
ing docks and to carry arriving containers to their final 
destinations. Between April and December, Pan- Atlantic 
The Trucker • 69
completed forty- four container voyages along the East 
and Gulf coasts. In a typical McLean touch, his engineers 
figured out that through the addition of small deck ex-
tensions, the tankers’ capacity could be increased from 
58 containers to 60 and then 62. If there was a way to 
squeeze a dollop of extra revenue from the aging tankers, 
McLean would find it.29
Again, the railroad and trucking industries did their 
best to close down the show. They protested vehemently 
that McLean’s takeover of Waterman without ICC ap-
proval was a blatant violation of the Interstate Com -
merce Act. Although Waterman had renounced its do -
mestic operating rights to escape ICC jurisdiction, that 
renunciation had not been accepted by the ICC—and 
Pan- Atlantic’s request for “temporary” authority to take 
over the Waterman rights, keeping them in the corporate 
family, made the entire deal look suspicious. In Novem-
ber 1956, an ICC examiner agreed. Although Malcom 
McLean was a “man of vision, determination and con-
siderable executive talent,” the examiner said, his pur -
chase of Waterman without commission approval broke 
the law. As punishment, he recommended that McLean 
Industries be forced to divest Waterman. The ICC re -
jected the examiner’s recommendation in 1957, leaving 
McLean in control of both Pan- Atlantic and Waterman, 
and, more important, of Waterman’s large fleet.
30
Malcom McLean was by no means the “inventor” of the 
shipping container. Metal cargo boxes of various shapes 
and sizes had been in use for decades, and numerous 
reports and studies supported the idea of containerized 
freight before the Ideal- X set sail. An American steam-
70 • Chapter 3
ship operator, Seatrain Lines, had operated specially 
built ships holding railway boxcars in metal cells as early 
as 1929, lifting the boxcars on and off with large dock-
side cranes. These ample precedents have led historians 
to downplay the nature of Malcom McLean’s achieve -
ments. His container was just a “new adaptation of a 
long- used transportation formula whose birth dates to 
the early years of the twentieth century,” French histo -
rian René Borruey asserts. American historian Donald 
Fitzgerald concurs: “Rather than a revolution, contain-
erization of the 1950s was a chapter in the history of 
development of maritime cargo transportation.”31
In a narrow sense, of course, these critics are correct. 
The high cost of freight handling was widely recognized 
as a critical problem in the early 1950s, and containers 
were much discussed as a potential solution. Malcom 
McLean was not writing on a blank slate. Yet the histo-
rians’ debate about precedence misses the transforma -
tional nature of McLean’s accomplishment. While many 
companies had tried putting freight into containers, 
those early containers did not fundamentally alter the 
economics of shipping and had no wider consequences.
Malcom McLean’s fundamental insight, common -
place today but quite radical in the 1950s, was that the 
shipping industry’s business was moving cargo, not sail-
ing ships. That insight led him to a concept of container-
ization quite different from anything that had come be-
fore. McLean understood that reducing the cost of 
shipping goods required not just a metal box but an en-
tire new way of handling freight. Every part of the sys-
tem—ports, ships, cranes, storage facilities, trucks, trains, 
and the operations of the shippers themselves—would 
The Trucker • 71
have to change. In that understanding, he was years 
ahead of almost everyone else in the transportation in-
dustry. His insights ushered in change so dramatic that 
even the experts at the International Container Bureau, 
people who had been pushing containers for decades, 
were astonished at what he had wrought. As one of that 
organization’s leaders confessed later, “We did not un-
derstand that at that time a revolution was taking place 
in the U.S.A.”
32
CHAPTER 4
The System
A dock strike loomed over East Coast ports in the au-
tumn of 1956. Facing the prospect that the Pan- Atlantic 
and Waterman fleets would sit idle, Malcom McLean 
decided to use the time to advantage. Six of Waterman’s 
C- 2 freighters were transferred to Pan- Atlantic’s control. 
They were sent to Waterman’s shipyard in Mobile, which 
had been closed after World War II but was reopened to 
convert them into pure containerships. The idea was to 
build a honeycomb of metal cells in the holds so that 
35- foot containers, two feet longer than those carried on 
the Ideal- X, could be lowered in and stacked five or six 
high. The ships were to be rebuilt and back at sea by 
1957. Of course, there was no model of a pure container-
ship, the metal cells did not exist, and no one had ever 
stacked containers five or six high. How tightly should 
the containers fit into the cells? How would a stack of 
six containers behave when a ship rolled in heavy seas? 
And how could the vessels be unloaded at ports where 
there were no land- based cranes? As was his way, Mc -
Lean did not preoccupy himself with such details. He 
simply told his staff to get the job done.1
The System • 73
The C- 2s, unlike Pan- Atlantic’s T- 2 tankers, had been 
designed to carry large amounts of mixed cargo in their 
five holds, and altering them posed no great problem. 
The decks were widened from 63 feet to 72 feet, and the 
hatches were expanded so that the entire container stor-
age area would be accessible from above. The cells to 
hold the containers inside the ship were a tougher chal-
lenge. At the Alabama State Docks in Mobile, Keith 
Tantlinger built a mock- up 20 feet high. The cell guides, 
vertical strips of steel with a 90- degree angle to hold the 
corners of a container, were mounted on hydraulic jacks, 
which could be raised and lowered to simulate a heeling 
ship. A crane tried to deposit and remove a container 
from the cell while it was at various angles, and instru-
ments measured the stresses and strains on the container 
and the cell as it tilted this way and that. After hundreds 
of tests, Tantlinger concluded that each cell should be 1¼ 
inches longer than the container it was meant to hold 
and ¾ of an inch wider; smaller dimensions made it too 
hard for the crane operator to ease the box into the cell 
guides, but larger ones allowed the container to shift too 
much. The cells were built and installed in the holds, giv-
ing the C- 2s the ability to carry 226 containers, almost 
four times the load of the Ideal- X.
2
Bigger ships with bigger loads would make loading 
and unloading vastly more complicated. The methods 
used for the smaller T- 2s were no longer good enough: 
with 226 containers, a loading rate of one container 
every seven minutes would require a vessel to spend 
more than twenty- four hours in port to take on a full 
load. Every aspect of the operation needed to be rede -
74 • Chapter 4
signed for faster handling. Tantlinger invented a new 
trailer chassis, with edges sloped so that a container 
being lowered by a crane would be guided into place 
automatically. A new locking system allowed a long -
shoreman to secure or release the container by raising or 
lowering a handle at each corner of the chassis, doing 
away with the labor- intensive routine of using iron 
chains to prevent the box from slipping off the truck. 
These changes meant that a truck could deliver or take 
on a container and quickly drive away without occupy-
ing precious space at dockside. The containers them -
selves were redesigned with heavy steel corner posts to 
support the weight of more containers above them, and 
a new refrigerated version had the cooling unit set within 
the profile of the container, so that it could be stacked 
along with nonrefrigerated boxes. New doors were de-
signed with the hinges recessed within the rear corner 
posts rather than protruding from the sides.
All of these new containers had a special steel casting 
built into each of their eight corners. The casting con -
tained an oblong hole designed to accommodate the 
most critical invention of all, the twist lock. This device, 
with one conical section pointing down and another up, 
could be inserted into the corner castings of containers 
as they were stacked. When one was lowered upon the 
other, a longshoreman could quickly turn the handle and 
lock the two boxes tightly together. By pulling the handle 
the other way, a worker could release the two boxes in 
seconds when it was time to discharge the ship.
3
Not until the cells and containers had been designed 
could Pan- Atlantic focus on the other critical component 
of its new operation, the cranes. The big dockside cranes 
The System • 75
in New York and Houston were inadequate to meet the 
new demands, and the other ports McLean wanted to 
serve lacked large cranes altogether. Shipboard cranes 
were the obvious answer, but existing shipboard cranes 
were not big enough to lift a 35- foot container weighing 
40,000 pounds. No established maritime crane manufac-
turer could design and deliver a test model within the 90 
days left in McLean’s ambitious schedule. In desperation, 
Tantlinger, who knew of the logging industry from his 
years in Washington State, proposed calling companies 
that manufactured diesel- powered logging cranes. Rob-
ert “Booze” Campbell, whose engineering firm helped 
redesign the ships and terminals, came upon the Skagit 
Steel & Iron Works in Sedro- Woolley, Washington.
Skagit Steel’s owner, Sidney McIntyre, had never 
worked on ships and was unfamiliar with electric cranes, 
but he agreed to build one. He was, in Campbell’s de -
scription, “a mechanical genius.” Within ninety days, 
Skagit Steel produced an enormous crane, which rode on 
a huge gantry that bridged an entire ship. The C- 2s had 
their wheelhouses amidships, so each vessel required two 
cranes, one fore and one aft. The cranes moved back -
ward and forward on rails placed along the ship’s sides 
and could travel across the width of the vessel, stopping 
immediately above any container and hoisting it verti-
cally. Long, folding arms allowed the cranes to travel out 
over the dock to pick up and lower containers.
4
The combination of cells and gantry cranes allowed 
the containers to be handled with unprecedented speed. 
Once the first column of cells had been unloaded, the 
ship could be loaded and unloaded simultaneously, in 
assembly- line fashion: each time the crane traveled to the 
76 • Chapter 4
dock to deposit an incoming trailer on an empty chassis, 
it would pick up an outgoing trailer and place it into an 
empty cell. With two cranes, each loading and unloading 
fifteen boxes an hour, the Gateway City, the first of the 
converted C- 2s, could be emptied and reloaded in just 
eight hours. The new ships were “the greatest advance 
made by the United States merchant marine in our time,” 
said Congressman Herbert Bonner, chairman of the Mer-
chant Marine Committee. Tantlinger was not so certain. 
Before the Gateway City’s first voyage, on October 4, 
1957, he dropped by the F. W. Woolworth store in New-
ark and purchased all of the store’s modeling clay. He cut 
the clay into small pieces with his pocket knife and 
wedged several pieces in the narrow spaces between the 
corners of the top containers and the metal frames of the 
cells. When the Gateway City docked in Miami three 
days later, he retrieved the clay to see how much the 
containers had shifted. The indentations on the clay re-
vealed that they had moved by only 5/16 of one inch—
proof, at last, that a stack of containers in the hold would 
not sway dangerously as a containership rolled at sea.5
Pan- Atlantic had four of its six pure containerships in 
service by the end of 1957, with a ship sailing south from 
New York or east from Houston every four and a half 
days. The last two converted C- 2s joined the fleet early 
in 1958. The Ideal- X and its sister tankers were sold off, 
along with 490 of the original 33- foot containers and 
300 matching chassis. Pan- Atlantic’s Sea- Land Service, 
its capacity five times larger than it had been a year ear-
lier, seemed poised for explosive growth.
6
Instead, it sailed into trouble. McLean planned to use 
two of the all- container ships to open service to Puerto 
The System • 77
Rico in March 1958. Puerto Rico was a potentially lu-
crative market. As an island, it relied on ships to provide 
almost all of its consumer goods. As a U.S. common -
wealth, it was subject to the Jones Act, a law requiring 
that cargo moving between U.S. ports use American- 
built ships with American crews. Limited competition 
allowed the few carriers serving Puerto Rico to charge 
very high rates, and McLean figured that Pan- Atlantic’s 
containers could easily grab market share. He figured 
without the longshoremen. When the first containership 
arrived from Newark, longshoremen in San Juan refused 
to unload the containers. Four costly months of negotia-
tion ensued, with two ships sitting idle. Pan- Atlantic fi-
nally bent to union demands to use large, twenty- four- 
man gangs to handle containerships, and regular service 
opened in August. The delay, plus the cost of getting rid 
of the now obsolete tankers, drove McLean Industries 
dangerously into the red. A net loss of $4.2 million for 
1958 nearly wiped out the earnings retained during the 
company’s first three years.
7
McLean was not deterred. Pan- Atlantic’s problems, he 
determined, were rooted in the maritime industry’s pas-
sive, slow- moving culture. Domestic ship lines, such as 
Pan- Atlantic, operated in a highly regulated environment 
that left little room for entrepreneurial spirit. American- 
owned lines operating internationally, such as Water -
man, were allowed to join international rate- making 
cartels. U.S.- flag ships, using American crews, had the 
exclusive right to carry the huge flow of U.S. government 
shipments, including military cargo, and many lines re-
ceived government operating subsidies as well. This shel-
tered culture led to excesses like Waterman’s headquar-
78 • Chapter 4
ters building in Mobile, with its revolving globe in the 
lobby and the lavish executive suite on the sixteenth 
floor. It did not breed the sorts of creative, aggressive, 
hungry employees that suited Malcom McLean. McLean 
decided it was time for a culture change. In June 1958, 
Pan- Atlantic, which now ran only containerships, moved 
to a new headquarters in a converted pineapple ware -
house near the Newark docks, while Waterman, the tra-
ditional breakbulk ship line, was deliberately left behind 
in Mobile.
The new Pan- Atlantic office had a very different atmo-
sphere. Malcom McLean had a simply furnished glass- 
fronted office facing a large, open floor on which desks 
were lined up side by side. Every morning, McLean wan-
dered the floor to check on the latest cash flow statement 
or the status of shipbuilding plans, disregarding hierar -
chy to get the information he wanted. The company’s 
tone, though, was set by his sister Clara. Her desk was 
in the middle of the floor, where she could keep an eye 
on everything and everyone. She knew who had come in 
late. She decorated the office; managers who were pro-
moted into glass- fronted offices of their own found that 
she had selected their furnishings for them, right down 
to the art. “If you put a picture or a calendar on the wall, 
you got a note from Clara the next morning,” one re -
called. She set the rules: coffee nowhere but the coffee 
room, no personal phone calls, desks cleared every night. 
She personally reviewed every single time card and ap-
proved every hire.
8
Malcom McLean was not the only shipping magnate 
with an interest in containerization. In 1954, as McLean 
The System • 79
was leasing terminals for his proposed roll on–roll off 
service on the East Coast, the Matson Navigation Com-
pany began to sponsor academic research on cargo han-
dling. Matson, based in San Francisco, was thinking 
about containers as well, but its approach was the polar 
opposite of McLean’s.
Matson, established in 1882, had been a loosely man-
aged, family- dominated company that grew from a sin-
gle ship in Hawaii into a transportation conglomerate. It 
owned California oil wells, oil tankers, and tanks in the 
Hawaiian Islands to store the oil. It owned passenger 
ships and built hotels on Waikiki Beach to attract pas -
sengers. It owned Hawaiian sugar plantations and the 
ships to carry sugar to the mainland. For a few years 
after World War II, it even owned an airline. None of this 
made much money, and the company’s underlying prob-
lem was that many of its big shareholders didn’t want it 
to make much money. The board of directors included 
representatives of major Hawaiian sugar and pineapple 
growers whose main interest was a cheap way to get 
their products to market. Whether the shipping service 
made a profit was almost incidental.9
Things began to change in 1947, when the Matson 
family convinced veteran steamship executive John E. 
Cushing to postpone his planned retirement and serve 
for three years as president. Cushing put the company on 
a budget for the first time and took a serious interest in 
addressing dismally low productivity. In 1948, Matson 
installed a revolutionary mechanized system to ship 
sugar to the mainland in bulk rather than in hundred- 
pound bags. Bulk sugar had required large investments—
huge bins at the Hawaii end to hold the raw sugar, a 
80 • Chapter 4
special fleet of trucks to carry the sugar from mills to the 
pier, conveyors to move the sugar from the trucks to the 
top of the bin, and more conveyors to recirculate it 
within the bins, so the sticky substance would not so -
lidify in place. These outlays had brought vastly lower 
costs. Sugar had given Matson a feel for what automa-
tion could achieve. Shortly after Cushing’s departure, the 
company decided to look into mechanizing the handling 
of the general cargo it carried between the West Coast 
and Hawaii.10
Matson moved deliberately. Pan- Atlantic, under 
McLean’s control, was a scrappy upstart building a 
brand- new business, and it risked little by acting quickly. 
Matson had no such haste; it had a large existing busi-
ness to protect, and its directors were tight with the purse 
strings. After commissioning outside studies for two 
years—the same two years it took Malcom McLean to 
move from a concept to a functioning business—Matson 
created an in- house research department in 1956. The 
man recruited to run it was Foster Weldon, a geophysi-
cist most recently involved in developing the Polaris 
nuclear submarine.
The contrast with Pan- Atlantic could not have been 
more stark. McLean’s engineers, people like Keith Tant-
linger and Robert Campbell, were no intellectual 
slouches, but they had worked in industry, not academia, 
and they were well advised not to flaunt their pedigrees 
in public. Weldon was a professor at the prestigious 
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and a well- known 
figure in the new science of operations research, the 
study of efficient ways to manage complex systems. Pan- 
Atlantic’s initial technology had been designed on the fly, 
The System • 81
using obsolete tanker ships, shipbuilding cranes, and 
containers whose length was determined by the size of 
the tankers, on the assumption that it could all be im -
proved once the business was up and running. Weldon 
found this catch- as- catch- can strategy bewildering. “All 
transportation companies have their own pet theories on 
the detailed equipment requirements comprising a ‘best’ 
container system, but there are no quantitative data re-
lating even such gross characteristics as container size to 
the economics of a total transportation operation,” he 
wrote pointedly. His goal, as he defined it, was to develop 
good data and use them to find the optimal way for Mat-
son to embark on container shipping.
11
Weldon quickly came upon the issues that would 
shape Matson’s approach. About half of the company’s 
general cargo was suitable for shipment in containers, 
but the flow was out of balance: for every ton the com-
pany shipped from Hawaii to the mainland, it shipped 
three tons from the mainland to Hawaii. Revenues from 
the westbound run would need to cover the cost of re-
turning large numbers of empty containers west to east. 
Even worse, much of Matson’s business came from food 
processors in California sending small loads to mom- 
and- pop grocery stores in the islands. Matson would 
need to consolidate these small shipments to fill whole 
containers in California, and would then have to open 
the containers in Honolulu and parcel out the loads for 
various destinations. This would make container ship -
ping expensive. On the other side of the equation, though, 
Weldon found that by eliminating the need to transfer 
individual pieces of cargo from trucks to ships and back 
again, containers would eliminate almost half the cost of 
82 • Chapter 4
Matson’s existing business. “This cost has increased 
steadily in the past and will continue to do so indefinitely 
as long as the operation remains a manual one,” he con-
cluded. “There is certainly no indication of a change in 
the current trend of spiraling longshore wages with no 
corresponding increase in labor productivity.” Given the 
urgent need to automate, Weldon conceived of a way to 
make the container work: if Matson could load those 
small shipments into containers in route- sequence order, 
delivery trucks could collect the containers in Honolulu 
and proceed immediately on their routes. The goods for 
each store would be handled only when the truck arrived 
there, making containerization on the Hawaii run eco -
nomically viable.12
Given that containers made sense, how big should 
they be? Weldon’s analysis pointed out that the smaller 
the size, the greater the number of loads that would fill 
entire containers going directly from shipper to recipient, 
with no reloading. On the other hand, two 10- foot con-
tainers would take twice as long to load on a ship as one 
20- foot box, making poor use of the company’s invest-
ment in cranes and ships. After analyzing thousands of 
Matson shipments by computer—a task that in 1956 
required feeding in thousands of punch cards—Weldon’s 
researchers concluded that vans of 20 to 25 feet would 
be most efficient in the Hawaii trade: larger containers 
would travel with too much empty space, while contain-
ers shorter than 20 feet would require too much loading 
time. They recommended that Matson start out by car -
rying containers on deck, as Pan- Atlantic had, with con-
ventional breakbulk cargo in the holds. By converting six 
of its fifteen C- 3 cargo ships to carry containers on deck, 
The System • 83
Matson would be able to offer weekly container service 
between Honolulu and both Los Angeles and San Fran-
cisco. Weldon found that this arrangement would be 
profitable even if the container business stayed small. If 
the business grew, the company could convert additional 
ships to carry only containers. Containerization, he con-
cluded, “would appear to present the fortunate circum-
stance of a promising initial course of action offering the 
option of going as far as desired and stopping at any 
point that prudent planning dictates.”13
Matson management accepted Weldon’s recommenda-
tions in early 1957. Leslie Harlander, a newly minted 
naval architect, was put in charge of the engineering. Har-
lander was told to hire a staff and begin detailed planning 
for every aspect of a container operation. He was given 
clear guidance to be careful about money. Every choice 
had to be justified based on whether it offered a higher 
return on investment than the alternatives.14
Harlander and his brother Don, an engineer who spe-
cialized in cranes, began to lay out their requirements for 
cranes in July 1957. In October, they went to Houston 
to observe the first arrival of Pan- Atlantic’s newly rebuilt 
Gateway City. The Gateway City was a C- 2 ship, slightly 
smaller and slower than the World War II–vintage C- 3s 
in Matson’s fleet, and it was equipped with Sea- Land’s 
two novel shipboard cranes. With both cranes working, 
the Gateway City’s turnaround time was no longer than 
that of the much smaller Ideal- X. As the Harlanders saw 
firsthand, though, the shipboard cranes had shortcom -
ings. Pan- Atlantic’s two crane drivers each sat high above 
the deck facing two colored lights. A green light told one 
driver that he could move the crane trolley over the side 
84 • Chapter 4
of the ship to deposit a container on the dock, while a 
red light told the other driver to wait. If both cranes ac-
cidentally dangled forty- thousand- pound containers 
over the side at the same time, the unbalanced weight 
could capsize the vessel. Matson, with plans to serve only 
a small number of large ports rather than many small 
ones, had no need to put up with this risk. The first big 
decision was an easy one: land- based cranes were the 
way to go.15
These would not be leftover cranes adapted from 
some other use like the cut- down shipyard cranes Pan- 
Atlantic had pressed into service in 1956. The original 
Pan- Atlantic cranes were revolvers, known in a shipping 
trade as “whirleys.” They did well enough at picking up 
a container from the deck of a ship and swinging it in an 
arc toward the dock, but their design made it difficult to 
lower the container precisely atop a trailer chassis, which 
slowed down the entire operation. Matson’s cranes were 
designed from scratch, with a requirement that they be 
able to unload an incoming container and load an outgo-
ing box within five minutes—a cycle two minutes shorter 
than that of Pan- Atlantic’s first cranes. The Matson 
cranes were to have booms that stretched ninety- five feet 
from the dock, more than enough to span the entire 
width of the ships in Matson’s fleet. The operator would 
control a trolley to move the lifting beam out over the 
ship, lower the lifting beam to pick up a container, hoist 
the container, and then travel toward the dock at speeds 
up to 410 feet per minute. At high speed, these move -
ments would have left each container swinging from the 
long hoist cables, far above the deck. Les Harlander de-
The System • 85
signed a special lifting spreader to solve the swing prob-
lem, testing its feasibility by building a model with his 
son’s Erector Set over Christmas of 1957.16
Weldon’s work had concluded by recommending a 
container 20 to 25 feet long. Harlander had the job of 
getting a design developed. In late 1957, Matson engaged 
Trailmobile, a manufacturer of truck trailers, to build 
two prototype containers and two chassis. Another con-
tractor constructed two lifting spreaders and a steel 
frame that would simulate a container cell within a ship. 
Months of testing followed. Gauges to measure strain 
were attached to the equipment, and the stresses were 
established as containers of various weights and densi -
ties were lowered into the cell, lifted out again, and 
placed on the chassis. The test cell was set at various 
angles to determine just how much clearance was needed 
between the containers and the vertical angle bars that 
formed the corners of the cell. Loaded boxes were stacked 
to measure the pressures on the bottom container, and 
lift trucks were run inside the containers to measure the 
strain on the floors.
When the results were in, Harlander’s team decided 
that the most economical size for Matson was 8½ feet 
high and 24 feet long, 11 feet shorter than Pan- Atlantic’s 
containers. The specifications took into account Wel -
don’s finding that each pound of weight saved was 
worth 20 cents, and each additional cubic foot inside 
the container worth $20. To improve structural integ -
rity, the roof would be a single sheet riveted in place 
rather than several panels attached with sheet metal 
screws, the design Trailmobile used for highway trailers. 
86 • Chapter 4
Steel corner posts would have to be able to support 
120,000 pounds—the weight of several stacked con -
tainers, and much more than the posts in Pan- Atlantic’s 
first containers could support. The doors, two layers of 
aluminum with stiffeners between, were designed to 
dovetail rather than to meet in a straight line, to with -
stand twisting pressure due to a ship’s rolling in a heavy 
sea. The floor would be Douglas fir with tongue- and- 
groove joints. Special attachments to make the contain-
ers compatible with specific cranes and forklifts were 
ruled out on grounds of cost. “It takes very little in the 
way of extra features to add, say, $200 to the cost of a 
container,” Har lander commented. “There would be a 
marked change in the total profit picture if the equip -
ment costs were, say, 10 percent higher than they need 
to be to do the job satisfactorily.”
17
Early in 1958, as McLean was preparing to open Pan- 
Atlantic’s new route to Puerto Rico, the Pacific Coast 
Engineering Company (PACECO), the lowest of eleven 
bidders, won the contract to build Matson’s first crane. 
PACECO was not comfortable with the unusual design, 
and it declared that it would not be responsible for 
swinging containers, problems with the trolley, or diffi-
culties working as fast as Matson specified. Harlander 
agreed that Matson would take responsibility for the 
design, and PACECO began work on an A- shaped mon-
strosity rising 113 feet from the dock, with legs 34 feet 
apart so that two trucks or two railcars could pass be-
neath the crane. Trailmobile built 600 containers and 
400 chassis to Matson’s specifications. Matson devel -
oped a lashing system so that containers could be stacked 
The System • 87
up to five- high on deck, depending on their weight, with-
out risk of damage at sea.18
Meanwhile, Weldon’s research department pursued 
its quest for optimality by investigating the most effi -
cient way to use Matson’s fleet. Renting time on an 
IBM 704 computer at several hundred dollars a minute, 
the researchers built a fully fledged simulation model of 
the business, incorporating data on volume and costs 
for more than three hundred commodities at every port 
the company served at every time of year. Then they 
added in data on port labor costs, the current utiliza -
tion of docks and cranes, and the load aboard each 
ship, to provide real- time answers to practical ques -
tions: Should a big Hawaii- bound ship call at Hilo and 
Lanai, or should it transfer its cargo to a feeder ship at 
Honolulu? What time of day should a vessel depart 
Honolulu so as to minimize total costs of delivering a 
load of pineapples to Oakland? Such simulations were 
new in the 1950s and had never been used in the ship -
ping industry.
19
Matson entered the container era on August 31, 1958, 
when the Hawaiian Merchant sailed from San Francisco 
with 20 containers on its deck and general cargo in its 
hold. The Hawaiian Merchant and five other C- 3s were 
soon carrying 75 containers at a time, painstakingly 
loaded by old revolving cranes while the first of Matson’s 
new cranes was being erected in Alameda, on the east 
side of San Francisco Bay. On January 9, 1959, the 
world’s first purpose- built container crane went into op-
eration, loading one 40,000- pound box every three min-
utes. At that rate, the Alameda terminal could handle 
88 • Chapter 4
400 tons per hour, more than 40 times the average pro-
ductivity of a longshore gang using shipboard winches. 
Similar cranes were installed in Los Angeles and Hono-
lulu in 1960.
20
By then, Matson had moved to phase two of the plan 
that Weldon had laid out at the start of 1957. The Ha-
waiian Citizen, another C- 3 freighter, was modified to 
carry containers stacked six high and six abreast in its 
holds as well as on its deck. Four vertical steel angle bars, 
attached to the ship’s structure, were installed to con -
strain each stack of containers within the holds. At the 
top of each angle bar, a large steel angle helped guide the 
containers as the crane lowered them into place. The 
hatches were expanded so that every stack of containers 
was accessible to the crane, making the hatch covers so 
large, 52 feet by 54 feet, that the crane would have to lift 
them out of the way before starting work on the contain-
ers beneath. One of the five holds was outfitted with a 
cooling system and electrical hookups for refrigerated 
containers, and lights in the engine room gave warning 
if the temperature within any of the 72 refrigerated con-
tainers was too high or too low. After the hold was 
loaded and the hatch covers put into place, additional 
containers could be stacked two- high atop the covers, 
giving the ship a capacity of 408 25- ton containers. 
Maintaining stability was a constant problem, especially 
on heavily loaded runs to Hawaii; when necessary, Mat-
son solved this by organizing the containers before load-
ing so that the heaviest would go at the bottom of each 
stack, lowering the vessel’s center of gravity.
The $3.8 million conversion was completed in six 
months, and in May 1960 the Hawaiian Citizen began 
The System • 89
sailing a triangular route between Los Angeles, Oakland, 
and Honolulu. When the vessel arrived in port, the long-
shoremen first removed the lashings from the deck con-
tainers. The crane lifted the deck containers onto chassis 
pulled by transporters, which took them to the marshal-
ing yard for onward shipment. Once the deck was clear, 
the crane lifted the hatch covers over one row and un-
loaded the first cell, occupied by a stack of six containers. 
The crane then switched to two- way operation. A trans-
porter pulling an outbound container would pull be -
neath the crane, alongside one with an empty chassis. 
Every three minutes, the hoist would dive into the ship, 
lift an arriving container, move it to the waiting chassis, 
then pick up the outbound container from the other 
chassis and return to the ship. As it finished each row, the 
crane would move along the dock to position the boom 
directly over the next row. Instead of spending half its 
time in port, like other ships, the Hawaiian Citizen was 
able to spend twelve and a half days of each fifteen- day 
voyage at sea, making money. Matson’s cautious direc-
tors were so pleased that they agreed to spend $30 mil-
lion for containerships by 1964.
21
By now, everyone in the close- knit maritime industry was 
talking containers. The talk, however, far outstripped the 
action. Aside from Matson in the Pacific and Pan- 
Atlantic, now renamed Sea- Land Service, on the Atlantic 
Coast, very few ship lines were putting containers to rou-
tine use. Carriers needed to replace their war- era fleets, 
but they were afraid to do so at a moment when the 
shipping industry seemed to be on the cusp of techno -
logical change.
90 • Chapter 4
It was easy enough to conclude that containers would 
change the business, but it was not obvious that they 
would revolutionize it. Containers, said Jerome L. Gold-
man, a leading naval architect, were “an expedient” that 
would do little to reduce costs. Many experts considered 
the container a niche technology, useful along the coast 
and on routes to U.S. island possessions, but impractical 
for international trade. The risk of placing multimillion- 
dollar bets on what might prove to be the wrong technol-
ogy was high. Sea- Land’s shipboard cranes were indeed 
radically new, but they soon developed a reputation for 
maintenance problems that caused ships to be delayed. 
American President Lines, which sailed across the Pa -
cific, created a container that attached to a single pair of 
wheels so that a truck could pull it without a chassis, but 
had to abandon the idea once the company added up the 
cost of giving every container extra structural elements 
to replace the chassis. The experience of Grace Line of-
fered a graphic warning. Grace had won a $7 million 
government subsidy to convert two vessels into contain-
erships and spent another $3 million on chassis, forklifts, 
and 1,500 aluminum containers, only to have longshore-
men in Venezuela refuse to handle its highly publicized 
ships. Having badly misjudged the politics and the eco-
nomics of container shipping, it would eventually sell the 
ships to Sea- Land at a loss. As a Grace executive noted 
ruefully, “The concept was valid, but the timing was 
wrong.”22
Sea- Land itself was finding the container business dif-
ficult. Its Puerto Rico service was struggling against Bull 
Line, which was well established on the route. Bull 
opened a trailership service in April 1960 and added con-
The System • 91
tainerships in May 1961, skimming some of the shippers 
McLean had hoped to convert to containers. Business on 
the mainland was not much better. A few food and drug 
companies, such as Nabisco and Bristol- Myers, signed 
up right away to ship from New York- area factories to 
Houston, and Houston’s chemical plants used containers 
to send fertilizers and insecticides to the Northeast. Most 
big industrial companies, though, were not desperate  
for container shipping. Ideas such as a combined sea- air 
service, with Sea- Land carrying cargo from New York  
to New Orleans and an airline taking it onward to Cen-
tral America, found few takers. The cargo flow through 
Pan- Atlantic’s home terminal at Newark jumped from 
228,000 tons in 1957 to 1.1 million tons in 1959, as the 
Puerto Rico service began—and then abruptly stopped 
growing. Another longshore strike in 1959 did serious 
damage. Revenues fell. From 1957 through 1960, Sea- 
Land’s container shipping business lost a total of $8 
 million. McLean Industries was forced to suspend its 
dividend.23
In desperation, McLean tried in 1959 to buy Seatrain 
Lines, the only other coastal ship line in the East and an 
opponent of Waterman’s efforts to secure operating sub-
sidies on international routes. Seatrain’s management 
turned him down. Competitors traded rumors that Mc-
Lean Industries was near bankruptcy. Waterman, un -
profitable without subsidies, was put up for sale, minus 
the cash and many of the ships that had made it so at-
tractive to McLean in 1955.
24
The problem, McLean decided, was the maritime mind- 
set: Pan- Atlantic’s staff, experienced in the slow- moving 
ways of the maritime industry, did not know how to sell 
92 • Chapter 4
to an industrial traffic manager who cared not about 
ships, but about getting freight to the customer on sched-
ule at low cost. McLean brought in a team of aggressive 
young trucking executives to turn the business around. 
He had agreed not to poach McLean Trucking employ-
ees when he gave up the trucking company in 1955. 
Now, former McLean Trucking employees, many of 
them still in their twenties or early thirties, began moving 
into key positions at Pan- Atlantic, alongside young tal-
ent headhunted from other big truck lines.
“They were just recruiting,” one of those hires remem-
bered. “It was like a football draft. You recruit the best 
quarterback.” Many were invited to Newark without 
being told what job McLean had in mind for them. When 
they arrived, they were given intelligence and personality 
tests—a rare practice in the 1950s. McLean wanted peo-
ple who were smart, aggressive, and entrepreneurial; the 
wrong test scores meant no job offer. Education did not 
matter; although Malcom McLean had a box at the Met-
ropolitan Opera, intellectual airs were frowned upon, 
and new hires were advised to fracture their grammar to 
fit in with a crowd of truckers. “When we had nothing 
else to do, we would stand and pitch pennies,” remem-
bered naval architect Charles Cushing, an MIT graduate 
who joined the company in 1960. “They don’t teach you 
to pitch pennies at the Wharton School.”
25
Those who made the grade were given large responsi-
bilities. Bernard Czachowski was hired from McLean 
Trucking to oversee Pan- Atlantic’s vital relations with 
the independent truck lines that picked up and delivered 
its freight. Kenneth Younger, from Roadway Freight, 
came to manage the Puerto Rican business. Paul Rich -
The System • 93
ardson, who had entered McLean Trucking’s manage -
ment training program out of college in 1952 and had 
stayed with the truck line when McLean spun it off, 
signed on as New England sales manager in 1960 and 
within eight months was in charge of sales nationwide. 
Richardson’s secret weapon was a simple form with the 
pompous title “Total Transportation Cost Analysis.” The 
form provided a side- by- side comparison of the costs of 
shipping a product by truck, rail, and containership, in-
cluding not just transportation rates, but also local 
pickup and delivery, warehousing, and insurance costs. 
Salesman were instructed to add up each column to show 
the saving containers would bring, and then multiply by 
the number of loads the company shipped over the 
course of a year. The bottom line was the total annual 
saving, a number much more likely to be large, and mem-
orable, than the traditional measure of a few dollars per 
ton.
26
The Pan- Atlantic name was dropped in early 1960, 
and the ship line was rechristened Sea- Land Service to 
emphasize that it was a new venture on the leading edge 
of the freight industry. The work was seven days a week, 
in an exciting, demanding environment. Memos were 
not wanted. Conflict among executives was a given; 
managers were expected to meet, thrash out their differ-
ences, and act. Performance was measured constantly, 
and rewarded not with cash but with stock in the fast- 
growing company. Decades later, those early Sea- Land 
employees remembered the years when they were creat-
ing the container shipping industry as the best time of 
their lives. “It was a hard- charging, fast- charging com-
pany. Malcom would give us assignments and we didn’t 
94 • Chapter 4
ask questions, we just went out and did ’em,” one said. 
Malcom McLean—universally called Malcom behind 
his back, but addressed by every single employee as Mr. 
McLean—presided over it all, constantly checking the 
numbers, making sure that the cash flowed.27
After a stinging $1.5 million loss in 1960, McLean 
sought to cope with adversity in his usual way: by plung-
ing deeper into debt. In 1961 Sea- Land bought four 
World War II tankers and lengthened them by inserting 
large sections, known as midbodies, built in a German 
shipyard. These “jumboized” vessels could carry 476 
containers—twice as many as Sea- Land’s existing con -
tainerships, eight times as many as the Ideal- X. Competi-
tors complained that the German reconstruction made 
Sea- Land’s vessels ineligible to sail domestic routes as 
“American” ships, but to no avail. The government ap-
proved McLean’s application to put the ships into service 
between Newark and California in 1962, making Sea- 
Land the only intracoastal ship line. The unbalanced 
trade made the economics of the intracoastal route 
treacherous: the eastbound service, heavy with canned 
fruits and vegetables from California’s Central Valley, 
handled ten thousand tons a month, but California- 
bound ships carried only seven thousand tons and lots of 
empty containers. Those same economics, though, as -
sured that there would be no serious competition on the 
intracoastal route. There simply was not enough freight.28
Even as Sea- Land expanded to the West Coast, Mc -
Lean kept a close eye on Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico was 
an attractive market for U.S. ship lines. The economy 
was growing by leaps and bounds under the common -
The System • 95
wealth government’s economic development program, 
Operation Bootstrap. The program, featuring generous 
tax incentives, lured hundreds of U.S.- based manufactur-
ers to what in the 1950s had been an impoverished and 
heavily agricultural island. They would import their raw 
materials from the U.S. mainland, use cheap Puerto 
Rican labor for assembly, and ship their products back 
to the United States. Private fixed investment in Puerto 
Rico had more than doubled between 1953 and 1958, 
and the island’s economic output was growing 8 to 10 
percent per year. This boom meant rapidly rising demand 
for shipping—and, thanks to complex U.S. laws govern-
ing the maritime sector, only U.S. domestic ship lines 
could handle the trade. Foreign- owned companies and 
the U.S. companies subsidized to sail international routes 
were ineligible.29
Sea- Land had been sailing to San Juan since 1958, but 
its service was less than exemplary. It owned no terminal. 
Incoming containers with freight for multiple customers 
were unstuffed in old aluminum warehouses near the 
dock, where the contents often sat for months because 
there was no system for notifying customers that their 
freight had arrived. Containers trucked elsewhere on the 
island tended to disappear, to be converted into shops, 
storage sheds, or homes. “It was chaotic,” recalled an 
executive in the Puerto Rico operation. Sea- Land’s efforts 
to gain market share in Puerto Rico had made little head-
way. Bull Insular Line, the dominant carrier, controlled 
more than half the shipments from the mainland to 
Puerto Rico and 90 percent of the freight headed north.30
In March 1961, McLean Industries made a surprise 
offer to buy Bull Line. The $10 million bid was an enor-
96 • Chapter 4
mous stretch for a company that was at the limit of its 
resources. McLean Industries’ huge loss in 1960 had 
wiped out all of its retained earnings. Sea- Land had a 
negative net worth of $1.1 million, although McLean’s 
accounting made the company’s situation look worse 
than it really was. Bull Line was heavily indebted as well, 
having lost money in the two prior years trying to com-
pete with Sea- Land. Its owners were eager to sell out. 
The attraction for McLean was that the deal would give 
Sea- Land a near- monopoly in the Puerto Rico trade—
which is exactly why federal antitrust authorities op -
posed it. Bull’s directors received government telegrams 
advising them not to proceed with the sale to McLean, 
and they quickly found another buyer. McLean was left 
to seek revenge by trying to block Bull’s efforts to ac -
quire two used ships from the navy.31
Then came a remarkable stroke of good fortune: the 
company that purchased Bull Line, a privately owned 
maritime conglomerate, had expanded its way into fi -
nancial trouble. It first stopped reconstruction on the 
two ships it had acquired for Bull Line, and then, in June 
1962, stopped sailing altogether. As Bull Line collapsed 
into bankruptcy, McLean was able to grab the two ships. 
Overnight, Sea- Land became the dominant carrier to an 
island that was almost totally dependent on U.S. ship -
ping. Before new competitors could move in, it quickly 
consolidated its position, scheduling containerships from 
Newark to San Juan every two days and adding sailings 
from the West Coast and Baltimore. Sea- Land spent 
more than $2 million on two new terminals in San Juan 
in 1962 and 1963. In a politically deft move, it also 
opened routes to the Puerto Rican ports of Ponce and 
The System • 97
Mayagüez. Neither city had much besides canned tuna 
to ship out in containers, but providing container service 
earned McLean the goodwill of Teodoro Moscoso, the 
creator of Operation Bootstrap and a powerful figure in 
Puerto Rico’s economic development.
32
The expansion of Sea- Land’s Puerto Rico service co-
incided with a remarkable flourishing of the island’s 
economy. In the 1950s, Operation Bootstrap had at -
tracted mainly small, labor- intensive factories to Puerto 
Rico. Many workers gained regular wage employment 
for the first time, and the resulting rise in personal in -
come drove a surge in consumer spending. Retail sales 
rose 91 percent between 1954 and 1963 after adjustment 
for inflation. A large share of that merchandise came 
from the mainland, filling the southbound ships in the 
Puerto Rico trade. As the island’s rising wages began to 
make it less attractive for labor- intensive factories, Op-
eration Bootstrap undertook a concerted drive to bring 
in large, capital- intensive manufacturers. Manufactur -
ing, only 18 percent of Puerto Rico’s economic output in 
1955, reached 21 percent in 1960 and 25 percent by 
1970, with most of the growth coming in nontraditional 
sectors such as pharmaceuticals and metal products. 
Total trade between Puerto Rico and the mainland nearly 
trebled during the 1960s, and almost all of it went by 
ship.33
Sea- Land benefited from this boom—but it also helped 
cause it. Puerto Rico’s shipping- dependent economy had 
been a prisoner of high transport costs. Between 1947 
and 1957, as U.S. prices overall were rising 31 percent, 
rates per ton for shipping between the mainland and 
Puerto Rico increased about 50 percent. Federal regula-
98 • Chapter 4
tors approved five general rate increases over that de -
cade, effectively taxing Puerto Rican consumers to cover 
the inefficiencies of U.S.- flag ship lines. McLean’s push 
into the Puerto Rico trade in 1958 began to shake up this 
rate structure, which benefited mainly Bull Line. Over 
the ensuing decade, by Sea- Land’s estimates, the cost of 
shipping consumer goods from New York to San Juan 
fell 19 percent, and the average rate per ton for freight 
shipped in full truckloads fell by a third. Lower south-
bound rates for industrial components and northbound 
rates for finished products magnified the advantages of 
opening factories in Puerto Rico, and McLean Industries 
established a new subsidiary to help manufacturers lo -
cate there. By 1967, Sea- Land was carrying 1,800 con-
tainers each week between the island and the U.S. main-
land, half of them to or from Puerto Rican factories.
34
Its unassailable position in Puerto Rico provided a 
firm base for Sea- Land’s growth. Sea- Land owned 7,848 
containers, 4,876 chassis, and 386 tractors at the end of 
1962. By the end of 1965, it had expanded to 13,535 
containers and controlled 15 containerships calling at 15 
ports, using Puerto Rico as a hub to serve the Virgin Is-
lands. At the center of this expanding empire was a new 
office building at Port Elizabeth, New Jersey, where the 
berths at the new Sea- Land terminal, the first purpose- 
built container terminal anywhere, were visible out the 
window. The building, like the rest of the Port Elizabeth 
complex, was built by the Port of New York Authority, 
without a nickel of Sea- Land’s money. “A lot of people 
thought Malcom was building a big pagoda,” recalled 
Gerald Toomey, who was recruited to Sea- Land in 1962. 
“He knew what he was doing. You put a pencil to what 
The System • 99
that building cost and what it’s saved the company, it 
turned out to be a very good deal.”35
Sea- Land was a large company by 1963, with nearly 
three thousand employees, and an increasingly difficult 
one to manage. Computers had arrived in 1962, but only 
for administrative purposes such as payroll; at Port Eliz-
abeth, Sea- Land kept track of its incoming and outgoing 
boxes on magnetic boards high on the walls of its oc -
tagonal control room, with an employee reaching a long 
pole to move the corresponding metal piece on the board 
each time a container was moved in the yard. At the end 
of each day, photos were taken of the board to provide 
a permanent record. Containers had a way of vanishing, 
especially in Puerto Rico, where a lack of warehouse 
space led many recipients to store goods in the contain-
ers they arrived in; headquarters produced an “aging 
report” listing containers that had not been seen for a 
week, and local supervisors frantically worked the 
phones to try to locate missing boxes before a manager 
called. Loading required teams of vessel planners to pore 
over sheets listing the weight and destination of each 
container as they figured out the best way to load each 
ship. Computers would not begin to take on that job 
until 1965.36
Malcom McLean could no longer be involved in every 
decision. Yet his basic approach to management re -
mained unchanged. McLean was still a daily presence at 
headquarters. “It wasn’t unusual that when you came to 
work, he’d say, ‘Good morning, how are you doing this 
morning?’ ” recalled a longtime Sea- Land accountant. 
“Malcom was a good salesman. He’d give the impres -
sion that he knew you.” When a building for consolidat-
100 • Chapter 4
ing container loads was needed in Baltimore or Jackson-
ville, McLean would go and choose the site. When 
refrigerated containers were needed, managers would 
spend two days debating how many to buy, only to hear 
McLean say, “I appreciate the exercise, but I’ve already 
signed a contract for five hundred.” When the chance 
came to buy Alaska Freight Lines in 1963, McLean 
hardly bothered to investigate the company’s finances, 
much less such operational issues as access to Anchorage 
harbor in the winter; McLean was in a hurry, and the 
chance to break into the Alaska trade quickly was too 
good to pass up.37
Above all, he kept his eye on the money. Teletypes clat-
tered constantly as outlying terminals sent booking in -
formation to headquarters. Clerks updated records 
showing how many days each container had carried rev-
enue traffic, how many tons it had hauled, how many 
dollars it had grossed. Geographic analysis documented 
the land transportation patterns of Sea- Land cargo. 
Monthly financial reports revealed how much revenue 
Sea- Land received from each commodity shipped from 
Newark to Texas, reminding all that an eighteen- ton 
container of liquor was twice as profitable as a four- ton 
container of toys. Weekly reports documented cash flow. 
And there was an endless stream of demands for better 
cost control. Shaving 1.6 cents off the cost of handling 
100 pounds in Ponce could save $14,300 a year. One 
more container lift per gang hour would save $180,000. 
Limiting long- distance telephone calls to three minutes 
would save $65,000. “Probably more attention was paid 
to financial results there than you find in any company 
The System • 101
around today,” remembered Earl Hall, later Sea- Land’s 
chief financial officer. In 1961, its sixth year, Sea- Land’s 
container business had finally moved into the black. So 
long as McLean was involved in running it, Sea- Land 
never lost money again.38
CHAPTER 5
The Battle for New York’s Port
For the Port of New York Authority, which was provid-
ing Pan- Atlantic a home, the arrival of containerization 
was a godsend. For New York City, it proved to be a 
disaster. City officials wasted enormous sums in a futile 
attempt to keep the city at the center of a shipping indus-
try whose changes New York could not possibly accom-
modate. Despite their costly efforts, the local economy 
was left devastated as new technology made the nation’s 
largest port obsolete.
In the early 1950s, before container shipping was even 
a concept, New York handled about one- third of Amer-
ica’s seaborne trade in manufactured goods. New York’s 
role was even larger when measured in dollars, because 
the port had increasingly come to specialize in high- value 
freight. This success was not easily earned, for the city 
had some important disadvantages as a port. The city’s 
piers—283 of them at midcentury, with 98 able to han-
dle oceangoing vessels—were strung out along the Man-
hattan and Brooklyn waterfronts. The main railroad 
connections, however, were across the harbor and across 
the Hudson River, in New Jersey. Freight trains arriving 
from points north, south, and west were sent to the rail-
The Battle for New York’s Port • 103
roads’ large yards located inland, where the cars were 
sorted by destination and moved by switch engine to one 
of the railroad terminals that lined the New Jersey side 
of the harbor. Each railroad owned a fleet of lighters, 
barges pushed by tugboats, to carry its freight cars across 
the harbor, either to or from its own New York terminal 
or to the dock being used by an oceangoing ship. Getting 
tires from Akron to a Europe- bound vessel thus entailed 
repeated shunting and shifting. It was economically vi-
able only because the Interstate Commerce Commission, 
the federal regulator, required railroads to charge the 
same rates to Brooklyn and Manhattan as to New Jersey; 
in effect, they were forced to throw in the lighter trip 
across the harbor for free to keep New York competitive 
with other East Coast ports.
1
The growth of the trucking industry starting in the 
1920s made the inadequacy of New York’s piers even 
more apparent. By midcentury, about half the cargo 
headed to or from the docks traveled by truck rather 
than by train. After coming through the Lincoln or Hol-
land Tunnel, truckers had to navigate dockside streets so 
congested that, in 1952, the city barred all but pier- 
bound vehicles from Twelfth Avenue, the waterfront 
street in midtown Manhattan. If they were headed to the 
Brooklyn docks, truckers coming from the west had to 
fight their way through Manhattan to cross one of the 
East River bridges. Trucks normally waited in line an 
hour or two just to enter a pier to pick up or deliver at a 
transit shed, a warehouse adjacent to the dock. The tran-
sit sheds were usually designed with truck (or, in some 
cases, rail) loading docks on one side of the structure and 
access to ships on the opposite side. Outbound cargo 
104 • Chapter 5
would be taken off the truck with a forklift or by hand, 
stored in the transit shed until the ship arrived, and then 
handled again to get it onto the dock, with each opera-
tion adding yet more expense.
2
Delivering by truck meant engaging a “public loader,” 
a type of enterprise unique to New York. A public loader 
was a gang that claimed the sole right to load and unload 
trucks on a particular pier, backed by the muscle of the 
International Longshoremen’s Association, the dock -
workers’ union. Shipping interests, mayors, governors, 
and the Teamsters union, which wanted its members to 
handle the work, had tried for decades to get rid of pub-
lic loaders. The men who did the loading were members 
of a thoroughly corrupt ILA branch, Local 1757, and 
were ostensibly owners of the “cooperative” for which 
they worked. In reality, however, the public loaders were 
secretly controlled by leaders of the ILA, which had 
joined forces with a trucking organization to create a 
“Truck Loading Authority” that published “official” 
rates for loading—5½ cents per 100- pound bag of al -
monds or marble chips; 6½ cents per 100 pounds of auto 
parts, tires, or fish guts; 8 cents per 100 pounds of canned 
beer—with all hours after 5 p.m. paid at time- and- a- half. 
Other firms that sought to handle unloading encoun -
tered vandalism and outright violence. Shippers that 
tried to circumvent the public loaders’ illicit monopoly 
by using their own workers to unload were liable to find 
that the ship would sail with their cargo sitting on the 
pier. Even after the newly established Waterfront Com-
mission banned public loaders in December 1953, thugs 
continued to control access to the docks.
3
The Battle for New York’s Port • 105
The port was a vastly important source of jobs in New 
York City. In 1951, as operations were returning to nor-
mal after the war, more than 100,000 New Yorkers were 
employed in water transportation, trucking, and ware -
housing, not counting railroad employees and workers 
in the municipal ferry system. Another 14,000 New 
Yorkers worked in “transportation services,” such as 
brokerage and freight forwarding, handling the com -
plexities of international trade in an age when each leg 
of a complicated journey had to be arranged, and paid 
for, separately. More than one- third of all “transporta-
tion services” workers nationally were located in New 
York. About three- fourths of the nation’s wholesale 
trade in the early 1950s was transacted through New 
York, even if the goods did not always pass through the 
city. Across the country, about 1 in 25 private- sector 
workers (excluding railroad employees) worked in mer-
chant wholesaling in 1951, but the ratio in New York 
was 1 in 15.4
Then there were the factories situated on the water -
front for ease of shipping. Food- processing plants had 
located along the Hudson River and the Brooklyn water-
front during the first quarter of the twentieth century, 
and dozens of factories making dyes, paints, pharmaceu-
ticals, and specialty chemicals dotted the shore from 
Long Island City in Queens to Bay Ridge in Brooklyn. At 
midcentury, New York’s expanding manufacturing sec-
tor occupied more than 33,000 chemical workers, 
78,000 workers in food processing, and thousands more 
in shipbuilding and electrical machinery, industries that 
needed inexpensive freight transportation. In 1956, ac-
106 • Chapter 5
cording to a conservative estimate, 90,000 manufactur-
ing jobs within New York City were “fairly directly” tied 
to imports arriving through the Port of New York.5
Marine construction and ship repair employed thou-
sands more. Add in the lawyers, bankers, and insurance 
brokers who serviced the shipping business, and the live-
lihoods of half a million workers may have depended 
directly on the port. The area near Bowling Green, in 
lower Manhattan, was thick with shipping company of-
fices, served by the insurers a few blocks away on John 
Newark Bay
Port Newark
Port Elizabeth
Hoboken
Jersey City
Red 
Hook
Long Island 
City
Greenwich 
Village
South 
Brooklyn
Midtown
Chelsea
H u d s o n  R i v e r
E a s t  R i v e r
New York
Harbor
New Jersey
Staten Island
Brooklyn
Queens
New York
M a n h at t a n
Howland Hook
Marine Terminal
Pier 6
Sunset
 Park
Bay 
Ridge
Pier 57
Figure 1. The port of New York.
The Battle for New York’s Port • 107
Street. Brooklyn, the most populous borough, had less 
shipping- related office work but more waterfront em -
ployment, with 13 percent of all jobs in the borough 
located directly on the docks.6
This powerful economic engine was already beginning 
to miss a few strokes in the years after World War II. Its 
location had helped the Port of New York gain market 
share during the war, as the refineries and military termi-
nals in Brooklyn and along the New Jersey waterfront 
dispatched thousands of ships across the North Atlantic. 
In 1944, when it moved nearly one- third of all U.S. wa-
terborne exports, New York handled twice as much cargo 
as in 1928 and five times as much as in the worst Depres-
sion year, 1933. Even during the war, though, experts 
were warning of the parlous state of the docks. Those 
warnings seemed to be confirmed after the war, as cargo 
traffic slumped owing to the lack of imports from a pros-
trate Europe. Although European recovery briefly boosted 
exports, the Korean War put the U.S. economy back on 
a war footing and devastated foreign trade. The total 
value of imports and exports at all U.S. ports sank from 
$18.5 billion in 1951 to $15.6 billion three years later, 
with exports hit particularly hard as factories switched 
production from consumer goods to war materiel.7
New York was losing the battle for that export traffic. 
World War II had stimulated economic growth in the 
West and the South, and factories in Dallas and Los An-
geles were much less likely to ship through the Port of 
New York than were plants in Rochester and Cleveland. 
The impending opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway in 
1956 would permit direct steamship traffic between 
Great Lakes ports and Europe, with one forecast predict-
108 • Chapter 5
ing that it would divert 8 percent of New York’s exports 
and 3 percent of its imports by 1965.8
High land freight rates were a further handicap. New 
York officials were prone to complain that the railroads 
unfairly favored Philadelphia, Baltimore, or Norfolk, 
but the truth was that railroads and truckers could serve 
those points at lower cost; railcars could reach the piers 
without being floated across the harbor, and truckers 
faced much less congestion. New York’s rate disadvan-
tage was even larger for truck freight than for rail 
freight, as sending a load by truck from Cleveland to the 
New York docks could cost four dollars more per ton 
Table 3. Port- Related Employment in New York City, 1951
Industry
Number of 
Workers
Numbers of 
Firms
Merchant wholesaling 206,315 22,135
Water transportation 67,453 637
Trucking and warehousing 36,164 3,494
Chemicals and allied products 33,472 1,129
Transportation services 13,968 1,030
Pulp, paper, and boxes 12,977 294
Primary metal industries 11,452 249
Stone, clay, glass manufacturing 9,880 590
Ship repair 9,469 84
Meat products 7,345 183
Petroleum refining 1,161 7
Grain- mill products 1,061 30
Total 410,717 29,862
Memo: New York City employment 3,008,364
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, County Business Patterns (1951).
The Battle for New York’s Port • 109
than sending it to Baltimore. Truckers frequently sought 
to add the cost of New York port delays to customers’ 
bills, charging sixty to eighty cents per ton more to de -
liver to the piers than to other Manhattan locations and 
generating a flood of complaints to the Federal Mari -
time Board.9
Many of the port’s other problems, however, were of 
its own making. After three decades of labor peace from 
1915 to 1945, labor turmoil became routine after the 
war. Some or all of the docks were closed by strikes in 
1945, 1947, 1948, 1951, and 1954. Between 1945 and 
1955 the International Longshoremen’s Association, the 
legally recognized union throughout the port, battled 
with the Communist- backed National Maritime Union 
and with the American Federation of Labor (AFL), which 
ejected the ILA on corruption charges in 1953 and then 
set up a new American Federation of Longshoremen in 
an effort to supplant it. With the demise of public load-
ers, the Teamsters union sought to claim the right to load 
and unload trucks on the piers, precipitating violent 
clashes between Teamsters and Longshoremen in 1954. 
Wildcat strikes on individual piers were common until 
the ILA, abetted by shipping interests that preferred one 
corrupt but reliable bargaining partner to constant con-
flict among competing unions, won a series of elections 
and regained control late in the decade. Throughout the 
1950s, the high risk of labor disruption encouraged ship-
pers to use other ports.10
Crime drove shippers away from New York as well. 
Cargo theft was rampant; most goods were packaged in 
small boxes or crates, so stealing wristwatches, liquor, or 
almost anything else was not particularly difficult. The 
110 • Chapter 5
bistate Waterfront Commission, created in 1953 after 
urgings from New York governor Thomas E. Dewey, 
made inroads against racketeering by banning public 
loaders and taking control of pier hiring. It deliberately 
sought to reduce the workforce and thereby raise long-
shoremen’s incomes in hopes that they would have less 
need to steal. Even after the Waterfront Commission 
barred 670 ex- convicts from longshore jobs, though, one 
in five longshoremen had a criminal record. Cargo theft 
remained a massive problem—so much so that both the 
Port Authority and the City of New York refused to co-
operate with the filming of a comedy starring James Cag-
ney lest the title, Never Steal Anything Small, give mov-
iegoers the wrong impression.
11
And if land- transport costs, labor concerns, and crime 
were not enough to deter businesses from shipping 
through New York, there were the port’s decrepit facili-
ties. The East River pier at Roosevelt Street dated to the 
1870s, the Hudson pier at West Twenty- sixth Street to 
1882. The city- owned pier at Christopher Street had 
been built in 1876. These piers, and dozens like them, 
were narrow fingers protruding into the harbor, designed 
for the days when ships would turn ninety degrees from 
the channel, point their bows toward the shore, and tie 
up to the dock for days on end. Some piers were not even 
wide enough for a large truck to turn around. For the 
privilege of leasing one of these obsolete facilities, ship 
lines paid between $0.96 and $2.00 per square foot per 
year, three to six times the going rate in other East Coast 
ports. The city had launched a program to renovate and 
fireproof its piers in 1947, but officials judged the cost of 
building new piers to be prohibitive. Many piers were 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 111
literally collapsing into the water. Abandoned pilings and 
floating debris from fallen piers were obstacles to naviga-
tion as well as an eyesore. “By 1980, it will be hard to 
find space in a whaling museum for piers that met the 
requirements of 1870 and were condemned as obsolete 
as long ago as 1920,” Port Authority executive director 
Austin J. Tobin commented in 1954.
12
Despite its name, the Port of New York Authority was a 
latecomer to maritime affairs. The major activity of the 
bistate agency since its founding in 1921 had been build-
ing and operating bridges and tunnels; after its early 
efforts to rationalize the tangle of rail lines and termi-
nals in the New York region were beaten back by the 
railroads, the Port Authority retreated from involve -
ment in freight transportation. 13 But, as political scien-
tists Wallace S. Sayre and Herbert Kaufman noted in 
1960, the independence and broad political support en-
joyed by New York’s public authorities, including the 
Port Authority, encouraged them to “seek out new out-
lets for their energies.” In the 1940s, the governors of 
both New York and New Jersey asked the agency to get 
involved with shipping, for entirely different reasons. 
New York governor Dewey thought that the Port Au -
thority might be able to push organized crime off the 
docks. New Jersey governor Walter Edge wanted it to 
develop piers on the New Jersey side of the harbor. Tobin 
and Port Authority chairman Howard Cullman jumped 
at the opportunity, calculating that taking on some port 
projects could build support for the Port Authority’s ex-
pansion into the business they most wanted it to enter: 
airports.
14
112 • Chapter 5
In 1947, the New York World Trade Corporation, a 
new state authority backed by key business leaders, pro-
posed to take over all of the city’s docks and later to 
acquire all private docks and waterfront warehouses as 
well. New York mayor William O’Dwyer rejected the 
plan and asked the Port Authority to look at the city’s 
piers. After a three- month study, the Port Authority of-
fered to sell $114 million of revenue bonds and build 
thirteen new steamship berths, four railroad carfloat ter-
minals, and a 1.5- million- square- foot produce terminal, 
while paying the city $5 million per year in rent. This 
would have been no small undertaking: the amount in-
volved, the equivalent of $1.2 billion in 2015 consumer 
prices, was more than the city had spent on its docks 
over decades. The proposal quickly encountered heavy 
fire. The ILA was opposed. So was the city’s Department 
of Marine and Aviation, which ran the docks; it had 
waged a bitter and unsuccessful battle to keep the Port 
Authority from taking over the city’s two main airports 
in 1947, and it did not want to give up another of its 
functions. Most of all, city politicians did not want the 
Port Authority on their turf. City officialdom was con-
vinced that the piers were a potential gold mine, not a 
badly outdated piece of infrastructure. As Robert F. Wag-
ner, then Manhattan borough president and a member of 
the city’s governing Board of Estimate, asked later, “The 
piers were making money; why didn’t they take over the 
sanitation department instead?” The Board of Estimate 
rejected the Port Authority’s offer in 1948 and turned 
down a revised proposal in 1949.15
While New York officials thought they could modern-
ize the city’s piers without the Port Authority’s involve-
The Battle for New York’s Port • 113
ment, the financially troubled city of Newark, New Jer-
sey, had no such illusions. Its money- losing municipal 
docks were in a state of physical collapse. Newark agreed 
to lease its docks (and its airport) to the Port Authority 
late in 1947. Between 1948 and 1952 the agency spent 
$11 million to dredge channels and rebuild wharves. It 
then announced construction of the biggest terminal  
yet on the New Jersey side, designed for the Waterman 
Steamship Company, which would be moving across the 
harbor from Brooklyn. The Waterman terminal would 
have a fifteen- hundred- foot wharf running parallel to the 
shore for faster docking and easier loading—a feature no 
New York City pier could match. Watching the construc-
tion in Newark and the defection of a major steamship 
operator, New York City’s controller suggested that per-
haps the city should give up its docks after all. “For some 
time the Port Authority dock control plans have looked 
good to us,” editorialized the New York World- Telegram. 
“Continued rejection can mean only that the city wants 
to hang on to waterfront control for political purposes.” 
A Port Authority spokesman declared that the agency 
was not inclined to begin negotiations with New York 
City again.16
Late in 1953, as the Waterman terminal neared com-
pletion, the Port Authority first heard of McLean Truck-
ing’s desire to build a terminal on New York Harbor. A 
trucking company was an odd candidate to lease prime 
waterfront land, and its plan to drive trucks aboard ships 
was even odder. The timing, however, could not have 
been better. Port Authority officials were eager to draw 
additional business to build on Port Newark’s success, 
and the agency was uniquely positioned to serve McLean 
114 • Chapter 5
Trucking’s needs. On the Newark waterfront it could 
offer space to marshal trucks, nearby rail lines, and easy 
connections to the newly built New Jersey Turnpike. 
Thanks to its ability to issue revenue bonds, the Port 
Authority had the means to finance any new facilities 
that would be required. All of these were advantages that 
New York City could not match. Malcom McLean and 
A. Lyle King, the agency’s director of marine terminals, 
quickly struck a deal.
17
The Port Authority proceeded to exercise its new wa-
terfront muscle. After signing McLean, it proposed to 
build a terminal for rubber importers at Port Newark—a 
terminal whose prospective tenants would relocate from 
cramped quarters in Brooklyn. In mid- 1955, it finally got 
a toehold on the New York side of the harbor by pur -
chasing two privately owned miles of Brooklyn water -
front, wharves that it had declined to acquire twice pre-
viously but now found politically opportune to buy. 
Proclaiming its interest in Brooklyn provided cover for 
another investment in New Jersey: a $9.3 million, four- 
berth terminal at Newark for Norton Lilly & Co. in No-
vember 1955, which led to that ship line’s move from 
Brooklyn to the New Jersey side of the harbor.18
Then came the most aggressive move of all. On De -
cember 2, 1955, New Jersey governor Robert Meyner 
announced that the Port Authority would develop a 450- 
acre tract of privately owned tidal marsh just south of 
Port Newark. The new Port Elizabeth, the largest port 
project ever undertaken in the United States, was planned 
eventually to accommodate twenty- five oceangoing ves-
sels at once, enabling New Jersey to handle more than 
one- fourth of all general cargo in the Port of New York. 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 115
Previously, the Port Authority had shown little interest 
in Elizabeth’s marshlands. McLean’s idea of putting 
truck trailers on ships changed that view entirely. Now, 
port planners foresaw a resurgence of coastal shipping, 
and the new Port Elizabeth would have ample wharf and 
upland available for “the proposed use of large shipping 
containers on specially adapted vessels.” There might not 
even be a transit shed, the most expensive part of pier 
construction. The first containership had yet to set sail, 
but the Port Authority was making clear that the future 
of container shipping would be in New Jersey, not in 
New York.19
The frenzy of activity on the New Jersey side of the har-
bor caused alarm in New York City. In the past, the New 
Jersey docks had been notable for their lack of activity; 
the modest traffic through Port Newark, mainly lumber, 
accounted for only a couple percent of the port’s nonoil 
cargo through the 1940s. As ship operators relocated 
from New York, however, its share would surely grow. 
With the amount of general cargo flat, every ton handled 
in New Jersey meant one ton less handled in New York, 
draining jobs from the city.
20
This simple calculus was a problem for New York 
politicians. Robert F. Wagner, familiar with the docks 
from years as Manhattan borough president, had been 
elected mayor in 1953 after assembling an unusually 
broad coalition of labor unions and ethnic groups. The 
one major bloc he failed to capture was the Italians, who 
voted overwhelmingly for incumbent mayor Vincent Im-
pellitteri. Gaining support from the group that supplied 
most of New York’s dockworkers may have been part of 
116 • Chapter 5
Wagner’s motivation in boosting Department of Marine 
and Aviation outlays to $13.2 million, more than double 
the previous level, in his first capital budget, announced 
in late 1954. Verbal weapons were soon unsheathed. In 
the summer of 1955, the city’s marine and aviation com-
missioner Vincent O’Connor charged the Port Authority 
with trying to “sabotage” city efforts, in the face of “a 
growing City determination to meet the challenge of its 
waterfront without yielding its precious waterfront 
properties to Port Authority control.” O’Connor, a law-
yer, was close to the ILA, and he shared its concern about 
the loss of jobs. That September, Mayor Wagner made 
pier reconstruction one of his top four capital- spending 
priorities, along with education, transit, and pollution 
control.21
Concern about the docks reached to Albany as well. 
New York governor Averell Harriman was sensitive to 
city objections that the Port Authority was promoting 
New Jersey at New York’s expense, but he also knew 
that the city lacked the money to rebuild its piers. A week 
after the plans for Port Elizabeth were announced, Jona-
than Bingham, a top Harriman aide (and former cam -
paign speechwriter for Wagner) called Matthias Lukens, 
Tobin’s deputy, and Howard Cullman, the agency’s 
chairman, to report that the governor was “disturbed” 
about Norton Lilly’s move from Brooklyn to New Jersey. 
“He also expressed the opinion he was not sure that we 
should be spending such money to take business away 
from New York City,” Lukens reported in a confidential 
memo for his files. According to Cullman, “[Bingham] 
said he understood completely that the New York piers 
were in shocking condition, but he did not think the 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 117
Governor should come out publicly and say the Port of 
New York Authority should run them.”22
The container was not yet reality in 1955, and given 
Malcom McLean’s status as a shipping- industry outsider, 
his plans had so far drawn little attention. With Mayor 
Wagner committed to keeping shipping in New York, 
O’Connor came forth with a six- year plan to build new 
piers and transit sheds, and the city began to pump large 
amounts of money into the docks. The 1956 capital bud-
get included $14.8 million for waterfront construction 
as the initial installment on a port program that was 
estimated to cost $130 million. The plans were state- of- 
the- art for the mid- 1950s, with piers parallel to the 
shoreline, separate terminal levels for passengers and 
freight, and paved patios that allowed trucks to back up 
to high loading docks on the land side of the transit 
sheds. There would be five new warehouses to handle 
rail freight lightered across the harbor and a big new 
terminal for Cunard’s transatlantic passenger liners. The 
crown jewel, clearly intended as a slap in the Port Au-
thority’s face, was a $17 million pier with a cargo and 
passenger terminal for Holland- America Line. After 
sixty- six years in New Jersey, that company would buck 
the trend that the Port Authority had unleashed and 
would move to Manhattan.23
After decades of inflation, the raw numbers are inad-
equate to convey the scope of the city’s plans. Mayor 
Wagner’s proposed six- year port reconstruction scheme 
was to cost $130 million in 1956 dollars—the equivalent 
of $1.1 billion in 2015 dollars. Across the country, the 
growing Port of Los Angeles had spent $25 million on 
construction over the ten- year period from 1945 to 
118 • Chapter 5
1954; Wagner proposed to spend two- thirds of that 
amount on the Holland- America terminal alone.
None of these proposals, of course, could do much 
about the underlying problems of the city’s docks. Costs 
were simply uncompetitive with those at other ports. The 
fundamental geographic disadvantages remained. The 
new lighter terminals might make it easier to handle rail 
freight destined for New York, but rail freight intended 
for an outbound ship would still have to be lightered 
across the harbor, off- loaded onto a pier, and then re -
loaded onto an oceangoing vessel. Trucks headed for the 
docks would still have to fight traffic in the Holland and 
Lincoln tunnels and along the waterfront. And, of course, 
rebuilt wharves would do nothing about the port’s labor 
problems, problems so severe that the reopening of one 
of the first piers rebuilt by the city was delayed by a dis-
pute over which ILA members would receive priority in 
hiring. O’Connor told ILA leaders directly in the sum -
mer of 1955 that the union’s practices were “a stumbling 
block for the city in its efforts to rent good piers in cer -
tain areas.”
24
Wagner’s own City Planning Commission was skepti-
cal of O’Connor’s port projects and recommended that 
the city restart negotiations to transfer its docks to the 
Port Authority; it “felt the Port Authority could assure 
greater development and utilization of the port with ben-
efits to the City’s economy.” The mayor was unrespon-
sive. Large- scale building was a hallmark of Wagner’s 
tenure, and he had no intention of ceding waterfront 
reconstruction to an agency over which he had no con-
trol. Wagner was close to organized labor, and the city’s 
labor leaders rightly feared that a Port Authority take -
The Battle for New York’s Port • 119
over would mean abandonment of some of the docks. 
Wagner’s lack of an ethnic base in New York politics—
“There weren’t too many German- Americans who voted 
in New York,” recalled Thomas Russell Jones, an influ-
ential black politician of the era—made it essential for 
him to seek support in black, Irish, and Italian neighbor-
hoods reliant on waterfront jobs. In this he succeeded: in 
his first reelection campaign, in 1957, Wagner captured 
about half the Italian vote, a big improvement over 1953. 
Business backed the port renovation effort as well. The 
Downtown–Lower Manhattan Association, a new civic 
group started by David Rockefeller of Chase National 
Bank, urged that all piers in lower Manhattan, save four 
on the East River, be retained for commercial shipping. 
“We support the present program of the Department of 
Marine and Aviation to continue to seek suitable piers in 
this area and for their modernization and rental on a 
self- sustaining basis,” the association said in its initial 
plan, released in 1958.25
Port spending took on unprecedented proportions. In 
September 1957, Mitsui Steamship Company agreed to 
move to a new $10.6 million city- owned terminal in 
Brooklyn, and Holland- America signed a twenty- year 
lease for the new terminal in Manhattan. By 1957, 
O’Connor was envisioning $200 million of waterfront 
investment by 1962—the equivalent of $1.7 billion in 
2015 dollars. Talk of selling the piers to the Port Author-
ity subsided. For their part, Tobin and King were now 
convinced that the container was the future, and the Port 
Authority lost interest in taking over city piers that 
would never have the acreage or transport connections 
for containers. Although the Port Authority was pro -
120 • Chapter 5
ceeding with plans to turn twenty- seven outmoded piers 
in Brooklyn into twelve modern ones, the agency under-
stood that it was in a race to recover its investment be-
fore container shipping made the reconstructed piers 
obsolete. “We already knew that we were building some-
thing [in Brooklyn] that would pay itself back, but it 
wasn’t the future,” recalled Guy F. Tozzoli, then the Port 
Authority’s head of port planning. The agency’s greater 
concern was that the city was unleashing a subsidy war 
that could depress pier rents. Tobin attacked the “utter 
inadequacy” of the city’s lease with Holland- America, 
contending that it involved a city subsidy of $458,000 a 
year, creating a “new policy of undercutting established 
pier rental levels by subsidizing private shippers.” 
O’Connor fired back that the “port octopus” was exert-
ing “all its propaganda efforts to thwart the City in the 
desire of New York to keep its waterfront under the con-
trol of its citizens rather than yield it to a bi- state group 
which thrives on its lack of direct responsibility to the 
public.”26
The City Planning Commission, meanwhile, was pro-
moting the view that the port might not be the city’s 
economic future after all. It wanted new office and resi-
dential buildings along the East River in lower Manhat-
tan, and suggested in 1959 that rebuilding derelict piers 
for shipping was not the best use of precious waterfront 
land. O’Connor responded by enlisting the support of 
Robert Moses, the city’s powerful parks commissioner 
and a member of the Planning Commission, and then by 
attacking the Planning Commission itself. Wrote O’Con-
nor: “The assertion, elaborately made by the Commis -
sion, that the potential of the Port of New York must be 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 121
judged by its recent past, rather than by an affirmative 
anticipation of its future, is an example of negative, 
rather than constructive planning. It would appear to be 
inconsistent with the dynamism of New York.”27
Left unsaid was that much of the city’s investment was 
already going to waste. In 1955, when O’Connor first 
proposed building five new terminals to handle cross- 
harbor lighter traffic, lighters moved 9.5 million short 
tons of cargo between New Jersey and the New York 
City docks. By 1960, after the city had spent $10 million 
on new lighter terminals, one- third of that traffic had 
vanished, and the trend was inexorably downward. The 
rebuilt Pier 57 on the Hudson River, custom- designed for 
Grace Line’s combined passenger and freight service, 
was modern enough, but the rapid expansion of air 
travel had made it obsolete almost before it opened. New 
piers alone clearly would not be enough to preserve the 
pattern of port commerce in New York City. The con -
tainer, hardly noticed by New York officials, was about 
to become the final nail in the coffin.
28
Within six months of its start, Pan- Atlantic’s container 
service was carrying 120 containers a week between 
Newark and Houston. The Pan- Atlantic terminal in 
Newark had become a busy transshipment hub where 
longshoremen consolidated smaller shipments into full 
containers. In early 1957, after barely nine months of 
operation, Pan- Atlantic leased six additional acres in 
Newark, twelve times its original space, to store contain-
ers and chassis. After a government- sponsored study 
found that container shipping cost 39–74 percent less 
per ton than conventional shipping, the Propeller Club, 
the association of top shipping company executives, de-
122 • Chapter 5
voted a full day of its 1958 convention to containers. No 
one could doubt that conventional shipping would soon 
be in trouble.
29
As container traffic surged, so did Port Newark’s for-
tunes. Newark’s cargo tonnage doubled between 1956 
and 1960 while tonnage on the New York side declined 
slightly, taking New Jersey’s share of total port traffic 
from 9 percent to 18 percent in just four years. Pan- 
Atlantic, renamed Sea- Land Service in 1960, accounted 
for more than one- third of Newark’s general cargo and 
6 percent of all general cargo in the Port of New York. 
All of this was achieved in the once moribund domestic 
trade, which had now shifted almost entirely out of 
Manhattan.30
A stone’s throw to the south of Sea- Land’s Newark 
terminal, dredges and bulldozers were beginning to 
shape Port Elizabeth. After two years of planning and 
after overcoming protests from wary local officials, the 
Port Authority had embarked in 1958 on a massive con-
struction project: a 9,000- foot channel, 800 feet wide 
and 35 feet deep, directly opposite Port Newark; thou-
sands of feet of wharf frontage; rail lines; and roadways 
up to 100 feet wide. Port Authority planners projected 
that Elizabeth would handle 2.5 million tons of con -
tainer traffic each year, four times the level then being 
handled in Port Newark. The differences from New 
York’s dock reconstruction were plain. In a 1961 speech 
discussing New York City’s port redevelopment, marine 
and aviation commissioner O’Connor did not utter the 
word “container,” and the piers he was building were 
meant to serve vessels carrying mixed freight, passengers, 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 123
and baggage. Port Elizabeth, by contrast, was designed 
from the start as a port for containers. Fortuitously, 
building on marshland required the Port Authority to 
start by dredging a channel, filling the wharf area with 
dredged spoil, and then allowing the fill to settle. Wharves 
and roadways did not get under construction until 1961, 
by which time Malcom McLean’s container concepts 
were even further developed. As eventually built, Port 
Elizabeth’s first berths each had about eighteen acres of 
paved area alongside, to cut down on the cost of moving 
containers from storage to ship. The design, the Port Au-
thority’s magazine explained, “permits a continuous 
flow of trailers to shipside in ‘assembly line’ fashion.”31
The new Sea- Land terminal at Port Elizabeth, opened 
in 1962, operated on a scale that was inconceivable in 
New York City. McLean won government permission to 
sail from Newark to the West Coast through the Panama 
Canal, and Sea- Land’s traffic soared: the Port of New 
York handled more domestic general cargo in 1962 than 
in any year since 1941. Almost all of this cargo moved 
across the Sea- Land pier in New Jersey. Almost none of 
it moved through New York City. The leisurely port calls 
of the early 1950s were becoming a memory. A mixed 
load of containers and breakbulk freight—the kind of 
load New York City’s new piers were built to handle—
was an economic drain, because the cost of extra port 
time to handle noncontainerized cargo ate up the savings 
from containerization. With no room to store thousands 
of containers and chassis and no way to handle the hun-
dreds of trucks and railcars coming to meet every ship, 
New York City’s docks were in no position to compete.
124 • Chapter 5
For the port as a whole, containerization still remained 
a sideshow in 1962. Containers accounted for only 8 
percent of the Port of New York’s general cargo, entirely 
in domestic trades. None of the port’s international traf-
fic, which remained in Manhattan and Brooklyn, was in 
containers. Yet the trend was ominous. As Sea- Land ex-
panded in the Caribbean, the island traffic that had once 
flowed through Bull Line’s pier in Brooklyn moved to 
Sea- Land’s complex in Elizabeth. New Jersey’s share of 
the port’s general cargo reached 12 percent in 1964.
Despite yet more huge investments by the city, includ-
ing a $25 million pier to handle high- speed ships on 
order by United States Lines, prospects for the city’s piers 
grew dimmer by the day. The Department of Marine and 
Aviation requested another $40 million for pier con -
struction in 1964–65. The ILA, desperate to fend off 
competing claims to use of the urban shoreline, proposed 
that new waterfront developments in Manhattan should 
combine piers with apartments. But the combative 
O’Connor was gone, and the City Planning Commission 
was not afraid to take on his successor, Leo Brown, in 
the Wagner administration’s waning days. “We believe it 
is neither necessary, desirable, nor indeed feasible to ‘turn 
back the clock’ and attempt to rebuild two more miles 
of Manhattan waterfront for cargo piers,” the commis-
sion warned in 1964. In any case, fundamental problems 
had not been solved. Shipping executives continued to 
complain about petty corruption on the docks and about 
the “chaotic conditions that exist in the transfer of cargo 
between land and water carriers along the waterfront.” 
New concrete was not enough to make ship lines want 
to dock in New York.
32
The Battle for New York’s Port • 125
The Port of New York Authority was expanding with-
out cease as container shipping became an international 
business. By 1965, half a dozen ship lines announced 
plans to launch container services to Europe in 1966, 
and dozens of new ships were on order. There was no 
longer any question of handling this business in Manhat-
tan, or even in Brooklyn. Only Port Elizabeth had the 
space to accommodate the surging demand for container 
facilities.
The Port Authority rushed expansion at Port Eliza -
beth late in 1965, with five new piers and sixty- five acres 
of paved storage areas. At the time, no fewer than seven 
steamship lines expressed interest in moving across the 
harbor from the outmoded docks in New York City. Just 
ten months later, the agency moved ahead with yet an-
other expansion, which would enable Port Elizabeth to 
handle twenty containerships at a time. The container 
tide was running so strong that the Port Authority no 
longer needed to pretend that Manhattan and Brooklyn 
would recover their places in the maritime universe. “As 
we go through the next ten years in the Port of New York 
there’s no question in our minds but that a lot of the 
cargo will have to go from the center part of the harbor 
where the big city buildings are over to the Newark- 
Elizabeth location,” Port Authority maritime director 
Lyle King told a television audience. “As a matter of fact, 
they are talking that way now, with the plans for new 
container ships.” When New York officials demanded 
that the Port Authority build container terminals in 
Brooklyn and on Staten Island in return for permission 
to erect the World Trade Center, they won only promises 
that the Port Authority would take a closer look. So far 
126 • Chapter 5
as New York City’s opinion makers were concerned, it 
had become perfectly acceptable for the Port of New 
York to be located in New Jersey. “The Port Authority, a 
bistate body, must view New York harbor as an entity 
and locate its facilities on the basis of geography and 
economics, not politics,” intoned the New York Times.33
The numbers tell the tale of New York’s port. In 1960, 
with only Sea- Land allowed to ship containers under the 
ILA contract, containerized freight accounted for less 
than 8 percent of the port’s general- cargo tonnage. More 
than three- quarters of all general cargo still came into 
Brooklyn and Manhattan. In 1966, with Port Elizabeth’s 
first phase up and running, nearly one- third of the port’s 
general cargo was crossing the docks in New Jersey, and 
13 percent was being shipped in containers. “The Port of 
New York—America’s container capital” became the 
Port Authority’s advertising slogan around the world. 
Financial interests began to speak openly of other 
“worthwhile activities” that could be located on Man-
hattan’s waterfront, such as apartment complexes and 
marinas. Manhattan’s docks had fallen so silent that one 
ILA official accused city marine and aviation commis -
sioner Leo Brown of doing “a fine job as a parking- lot 
operator.”
34
New York City dockers and politicians fought back by 
seeking to block the World Trade Center and picketing 
city hall. “If [the Port Authority] can put money into 
Elizabeth and Newark, why can’t they spend some in 
New York, to help create some permanent jobs to replace 
those lost by the moving of the Brooklyn Navy Yard?” 
asked Robert Price, deputy mayor under John V. Lindsay, 
in 1966. The problem, he said, was simple unfairness. 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 127
“New York City handles two thirds of the deep- sea cargo 
and has gotten only one third of the Port Authority’s 
investment.” All the Port Authority could offer in re -
sponse was the promise that the relatively modern 
Brooklyn docks would continue to handle breakbulk 
cargo, although, “with breakbulk operations diminish -
ing, it is unlikely that new conventional piers will be built 
in the near or distant future.”35
The Lindsay administration’s public bluster notwith-
standing, officials now recognized that the Manhattan 
docks had no future. In 1966, parks commissioner 
Thomas Hoving requested permission to convert Pier 42 
in Greenwich Village to recreational use; over its protes-
tations, the Department of Marine and Aviation was 
forced to cede the pier’s upper story. By the following 
year, a dozen carriers had placed their first orders for 
new vessels meant to carry nothing but containers, both 
in their holds and on deck. No fewer than sixty- four of 
these gigantic ships were under construction, and the 
Port Authority touted a study showing that 75 percent 
of the Port of New York’s general cargo could move in 
containers. When the ILA’s Manhattan locals sought a 
meeting with Lindsay to demand that the city build new 
piers to save their jobs, even the new marine and aviation 
commissioner, Herbert Halberg, advised that “to build 
marine terminals in Manhattan, in the quantity re -
quested, is not at present good economic planning based 
on the needs of the marine industry, nor good city 
planning.”36
The union made a last- ditch effort to preserve the old 
port by hiring Vincent O’Connor, Wagner’s marine and 
aviation commissioner, to lobby for pier construction. 
128 • Chapter 5
O’Connor delivered a plan for a combined ship/rail/
truck terminal in lower Manhattan with an airplane 
landing strip on the roof. Another scheme called for a 
“vertical pier” over the East River, using technology de-
veloped for automated parking garages to lift containers 
from shipboard to storage places high in the sky. Such 
fantasies were of no use. “With few exceptions, all of the 
major ocean carriers operating containerships at the Port 
of New York are berthing at Elizabeth,” the Port Author-
ity reported in 1969. When proposals for a new passen-
ger ship terminal reached the front burner in 1970, Lind-
say decided to get the city out of the port business at long 
last. “Dear Austin,” he wrote Port Authority chief Tobin, 
in language unthinkable a few years earlier. “After con-
sidering the alternatives available to us, I am convinced 
that the entity best able to construct and operate the 
terminal is the Port Authority.” The passenger terminal 
would eventually be built in Manhattan—but the agency, 
soon to be renamed the Port Authority of New York and 
New Jersey, had no further opposition from city govern-
ment as it developed a vast new port well away from its 
geographic roots.
37
As containers supplanted conventional ships, New 
Jersey’s share of the port’s general cargo reached 63 per-
cent in 1970. Two years later, 549,731 containers crossed 
the New Jersey docks. In New York City, though, only 
destruction was visible. Tonnage at the Port Authority’s 
Brooklyn docks fell 18 percent between 1965 and 1970. 
“The container is digging our graves and we cannot live 
off containers,” ILA president Thomas Gleason com -
plained, and he was not far wrong. In 1963–64, Manhat-
tan employers used 1.4 million days of longshore labor. 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 129
Hirings slid below a million in 1967–68, breached 
350,000 in 1970–71, and dropped to 127,041 in 1975–
76—a 91 percent decline in longshore employment in 
twelve years. Total employment at marine cargo- handling 
businesses in Manhattan, including office work, fell from 
19,007 in 1964 to just 7,934 in 1976. The situation in 
Brooklyn was better thanks to the Port Authority’s in -
vestments, but not for long. Two years after Manhattan’s 
longshore employment began its protracted decline, 
Brooklyn’s followed, dropping from 2.3 million hirings 
in 1965–66 to 1.6 million in 1970–71 and to just 930,000 
in 1975–76. By the time the Waterfront Commission 
closed its hiring hall at the Bush Docks in 1971, employ-
ment there and at the adjoining Brooklyn Army Terminal 
had fallen 78 percent in a decade. Brooklyn’s once mighty 
cargo- handling industry was just a shadow of its former 
self.38
On the New Jersey side, meanwhile, growth exceeded 
all forecasts. Stevedores and ship lines were complaining 
of a labor shortage. Forty ship lines were operating from 
Port Newark and Port Elizabeth in 1973. The new port’s 
relentless expansion led to a 30 percent increase in hir -
ings between 1963 and 1970, despite the efficiencies of 
containerization.
By the middle of the 1970s, the New York docks were 
mostly a memory. Lighters carried a grand total of 
129,000 tons of freight to waiting ships in 1974—less 
than one- tenth of the load moved in 1970, one- fiftieth 
as much as in 1960. Some shipping remained in Brook-
lyn, but Piers 6, 7, and 8, fully rebuilt in the late 1950s 
and known as “Little Japan” for their tenants, emptied 
out as five Japanese carriers moved to New Jersey. Bull 
130 • Chapter 5
Line, whose Puerto Rico business was a mainstay of the 
Brooklyn docks, shrank drastically before closing alto -
gether in 1977. The four- pier complex on the Hudson 
River north of Fourteenth Street, reconstructed as a 
state- of- the- art terminal for United States Lines in 1963, 
stood vacant and unrentable, a monument to the city’s 
costly unwillingness to accept that its time as a port was 
over. When new tenants finally appeared, years later, the 
Chelsea Piers reopened for an entirely different use: 
recreation.39
The decline of the docks reverberated through New York 
City’s economy, most strongly in the poorest neighbor-
hoods of Brooklyn. In 1960, there were only 23 census 
tracts, of the 836 in the borough, in which at least 10 
percent of the labor force worked in the trucking and 
maritime industries. On a map, these tracts form a belt 
parallel to the waterfront, from Atlantic Avenue in the 
north to Sunset Park in the south. They had much in 
common: large numbers of immigrants, mainly Italian; 
low incomes; and very low education levels. In Tract 67 
in South Brooklyn, 57 percent of adults had fewer than 
eight years of schooling. In Tract 49 in what is now Cob-
ble Hill, 64 percent of adults had not gone beyond the 
eighth grade. Tract 63 in South Brooklyn was home to 
1,071 employed workers—including only four with col-
lege degrees. By 1970, transportation- industry employ-
ment had fallen sharply throughout this entire district, 
and the population had plummeted. The depths of the 
decline could be seen in a housing study conducted a few 
years later: in Sunset Park and Windsor Terrace, an area 
adjoining the docks with more than 100,000 residents, 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 131
not a single privately owned housing unit was completed 
in 1975.40
The revolutionary changes in cargo handling had far 
more dire implications for off- dock workers in transpor-
tation and distribution. Between 1964 and 1976, the 
number of trucking and warehousing workers rose na-
tionally, but the number in New York fell sharply after 
1970. With fewer vessels calling at New York City, fewer 
trucks were needed to deliver and collect cargo at the 
piers. Transit warehouses were abandoned or put to far 
less labor- intensive uses, such as parking. An entirely dif-
ferent pattern of goods distribution took hold. Sealed 
containers filled with export freight were delivered to 
Newark and Elizabeth, where they were stacked in the 
open until the vessel arrived; only small loads to be con-
solidated in single containers now required sorting in a 
warehouse. Imported containers were hauled straight 
from the pier to new single- story warehouses built on 
large plots in central New Jersey and eastern Pennsylva-
nia. There, businesses could enjoy lower labor costs, 
while benefiting from the growing network of superhigh-
ways giving easy access to the port. Trucking and ware-
housing employment in these areas tracked national 
trends much more closely than in New York.
Employment in wholesaling, traditionally one of New 
York’s leading industries, was hurt as well, even as it was 
growing strongly across the country. If employment 
change in Manhattan and Brooklyn had mirrored na -
tional trends in these sectors from 1964 to 1976, the two 
boroughs would have added 200,000 jobs, most of them 
suitable for manual or clerical workers. Instead, New 
York lost more than 70,000 jobs in these port- related 
132 • Chapter 5
industries, while similar employment nationally rose 32 
percent.
The changes in transport costs induced by container-
ization hit manufacturing, too, eliminating not only 
factory- floor jobs but also related trucking and distribu-
tion work as plants moved out of New York. Factory 
employment in New York City had begun to fall in the 
mid- 1950s, a decade before the container came into 
widespread use, yet the city retained a surprisingly robust 
factory sector into the 1960s. In 1964, New York’s five 
boroughs were home to just over 30,000 manufacturing 
establishments employing nearly 900,000 workers. Al -
most two- thirds of the city’s manufacturers were located 
in Manhattan, where the apparel and printing industries 
dominated. The factory sector held steady through 1967, 
then abruptly collapsed. Between 1967 and 1976, New 
York lost a fourth of its factories and one- third of its 
manufacturing jobs. The scope of this deindustrializa -
tion was shockingly widespread, with forty- five of forty- 
seven important manufacturing industries experiencing 
double- digit declines in employment.41
How much of the loss of industry can be blamed on 
the container? There can be no definitive answer, as con-
tainerization was only one of many forces affecting man-
ufacturers during the late 1960s and the first half of the 
1970s. This period saw the completion of expressways 
that opened up suburban acreage to industrial develop-
ment. New York’s high electricity costs pushed out some 
factories. The general shift of population to the South 
and West accelerated, leaving New York factories poorly 
situated to serve expanding markets. The economic 
downturn of the early 1970s contributed to a fall in 
The Battle for New York’s Port • 133
manufacturing employment nationwide, and New York’s 
outmoded factories, often housed in antiquated build -
ings with little land on which to expand or rebuild, bore 
the brunt of this shrinkage.
There can be no doubt, however, that containerization 
eliminated one of the key reasons for operating a factory 
in New York City: ease of shipment. A New York City 
location had long offered transport- cost advantages for 
factories serving foreign or distant domestic markets, as 
local plants could get their goods loaded on ships with 
much less handling than could factories inland. The con-
tainer turned the economics of location on its head. Now, 
a company could replace its crowded multistory plant in 
Brooklyn or Manhattan with a modern, single- story fac-
tory in New Jersey or Pennsylvania, could enjoy lower 
taxes and electricity costs at its new home, and could 
send a container of goods to Port Elizabeth for a fraction 
of the cost of a plant in Manhattan or Brooklyn. This is 
exactly what occurred: while industry fled the city, 83 
percent of the manufacturing jobs that left New York 
between 1961 and 1976 ended up no farther away than 
Pennsylvania, upstate New York, or Connecticut.
42
In 1962, the Brooklyn waterfront was still lined with 
piers crowded with ships, vast transit sheds, and large, 
multistory factory buildings literally a stone’s throw 
from the docks. The shift of shipping to New Jersey 
through the 1960s, combined with the closing of the 
Brooklyn Navy Yard in 1966, helped destroy the indus-
trial base of one of the largest manufacturing centers in 
the country. Long known for having a disproportion -
ately large share of the New York region’s manufactur-
ing, Brooklyn was remarkable for its disproportionately 
134 • Chapter 5
small share of manufacturing activity by 1980. Economic 
conditions were so bad that Brooklynites abandoned the 
borough in droves. The population fell 14 percent be -
tween 1971 and 1980. Inflation- adjusted personal in -
come fell for eight consecutive years. Not until 1986 did 
Brooklyn workers regain the income level they collec -
tively enjoyed in 1972.43
The container was not the sole cause of the surprising 
and painful economic changes of the 1960s and 1970s, 
but it was an important cause. Container technology de-
veloped far more quickly and affected transportation 
industries far more significantly than even its most ar -
dent proponents had imagined. New York was only the 
first established shipping center whose economy would 
be transformed in ways that were unimaginable before 
the container arrived on the scene.
CHAPTER 6
Union Disunion
The dislike between Teddy Gleason and Harry Bridges 
was almost visceral. Gleason, a voluble Irishman born 
hard by the New York docks, held together the Interna-
tional Longshoremen’s Association, the union represent-
ing dockworkers from Maine to Texas, with a combina-
tion of personal charm, warm humor, endless patience, 
and more than occasional tolerance of corruption. 
Bridges was an Australian- born ascetic, a man whose 
role in the brutal battles that brought the International 
Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union (ILWU) to 
power in Pacific ports made him a legend among his 
members. The two men disagreed about almost every -
thing, including how their unions should respond to the 
threat that automation posed to longshoremen’s jobs. 
For a decade beginning in 1956, they struggled with very 
similar issues in very different ways. Both leaders under-
stood from the outset that automation could put tens of 
thousands of jobs at risk and transform shoreside labor—
their members’ labor—into almost an incidental expense. 
They ended up finding different ways to win extraordi-
nary benefits for their members—in return for allowing 
136 • Chapter 6
the container to reshape the long- established pattern of 
life on and around the docks.
It was in New York, where Gleason had run a local 
ILA union and then become the chief deputy to “Cap -
tain” William Bradley, the international president, that 
automation first arose as a major labor- relations issue. 
The New York Shipping Association, the group of steve-
doring companies and ship lines that negotiated the local 
contract with the ILA, offered an unusual proposal in 
1954. Shippers were starting to send their export cargo 
to the dock already tied on wooden pallets, intending 
that the entire pallet be transported as a single unit. Since 
pallets were easy to move with forklifts on the pier and 
to stow with forklifts inside the ship, the Shipping As -
sociation asked the union to handle them with gangs of 
only 16 men at each hatch, rather than the normal com-
plement of 21 or 22. The ILA quickly did the math: the 
companies’ proposal could mean the loss of up to 30 
jobs on a vessel with five hatches. The union objected, 
and the Shipping Association retreated.1
Pan- Atlantic’s venture at Port Newark two years later 
initially attracted little attention from the union. Port 
Newark, like all parts of New York harbor, operated 
under ILA contracts. Gleason knew Malcom McLean—
the ILA had organized some McLean Trucking ware -
house workers in 1939—and the union agreed to handle 
Pan- Atlantic’s containers when the Ideal- X first set sail 
in 1956. Some union leaders made clear their distaste for 
the container, but the ILA had a host of more pressing 
concerns: it was in internal turmoil; it faced yet another 
attempt to oust it as the sole union on New York’s docks; 
its portwide contract was set to expire on September 30, 
Union Disunion • 137
1956; and its top bargaining demand, a single contract 
covering the entire Atlantic and Gulf coasts, was meeting 
strong management resistance. Members at Port Newark 
were worried about preserving their system for assigning 
work, which sought to equalize their earnings. In the 
grand scheme of things, two small ships carrying a few 
containers were not a priority at union headquarters on 
West Fourteenth Street in Manhattan. Besides, as an ILA 
official later told Congress, Pan- Atlantic’s was a new op-
eration that added longshore jobs rather than removing 
existing jobs. The servicing of Pan- Atlantic’s container-
ships, along with the work of consolidating small ship-
ments into full containers at Pan- Atlantic’s terminal, was 
divided between two ILA locals, one black and one 
white, on the understanding that most of the twenty- one 
men in each gang were not needed for loading and un-
loading and would stay out of the way.
2
Automation became a serious issue when the ILA ne-
gotiated new contracts in the fall of 1956. After observ-
ing McLean’s container operation, the New York Ship-
ping Association sought freedom for employers to hire 
only as many longshoremen as they wanted “for any 
type of operation not practiced at this time.” An even 
more ominous issue arose in New Orleans, where the 
employers wanted to define longshore work as moving 
cargo from a point of rest on the wharf to the ship—lan-
guage that would have shut the ILA out of work loading 
or emptying containers or moving them within the ter -
minal area. Both proposals were eventually dropped, 
and after a ten- day strike the union achieved much of its 
main goal, winning a single contract covering wages 
and pensions from Maine to Virginia. Gleason, the 
138 • Chapter 6
union’s chief negotiator in New York, gave absolutely 
no ground on the automation- related demands, but the 
battle lines had been drawn. As a presidential board of 
inquiry noted dryly after the strike, proposals for smaller 
gang sizes “were a bone of contention with the union.”3
By 1958, the ILA had seen off competing unions in 
New York and was free to turn its full attention to auto-
mation. The first returns on container shipping were in, 
and they were alarming. “A containership can be loaded 
and unloaded in almost one- sixth of the time required 
for a conventional cargo ship and with about one- third 
of the labor,” McLean Industries told shareholders after 
two years of operation. Other ship lines were examining 
containers, and, unlike Pan- Atlantic, they wanted to 
move consolidation of small shipments away from the 
docks to inland sites, where it would be out of the ILA’s 
jurisdiction. The match was lit by Grace Line, a company 
specializing in the South America trade. In November 
1958, Grace docked its new Santa Rosa on the Hudson. 
The vessel was designed such that workers could load 
containers and mixed cargo by rolling them through 
doors in the side rather than hoisting them through 
hatches in the deck. Citing the ease of loading, Grace 
asked to hire only five or six men for each hatch. ILA 
Local 791 promptly refused to work the ship. When the 
company held firm, the ILA announced a boycott of all 
containers, except Pan- Atlantic’s, unless they had been 
filled by ILA members. Fred Field, head of the council of 
New York ILA locals, angrily accused the ship lines of 
“soliciting freight in prepackaged containers.”4
With tensions mounting, the ILA stopped work on 
November 18 and convened twenty- one thousand long-
shoremen at Madison Square Garden to hear about the 
Union Disunion • 139
threat of mechanization. Union leaders demanded that 
employers “share the benefits” and insisted that they 
would not accept smaller gang sizes. The issue was criti-
cal to the union: if Grace Line had its way, far fewer men 
would be needed on the docks. Intense negotiations led 
to a temporary compromise in December: the ILA agreed 
that companies using containers before November 12, 
1958—including Grace—could continue to use them, so 
long as they hired twenty- one men for each hatch. On 
December 17, the port’s labor arbitrator declared, “The 
problem of containers is well on the road to an amicable 
solution by both parties.”
5
It was not. Negotiations over container use resumed 
in January 1959 but got nowhere. The issue festered 
until August, the start of bargaining on new contracts for 
all East Coast and Gulf Coast ports. At the most impor-
tant talks, covering New York Harbor, the ILA demanded 
that ship lines “spread the fruits of automation.” It of -
fered to eliminate one or two longshoremen from each 
gang. In return, it sought a six- hour workday and a re-
quirement that every container, whatever its origin, be 
“stripped and stuffed”—that is, emptied and then re -
loaded—by ILA members on the pier. Stripping and 
stuffing, of course, were entirely make- work, and would 
have eliminated any cost savings from containerization. 
A few days later, the New York Shipping Association 
countered with a general concept: employers would pro-
tect the jobs of regular longshoremen in return for un-
limited freedom to automate.
6
In a conventional labor- management relationship, a 
management proposal to guarantee jobs in return for the 
right to automate would have led to intense negotiations. 
Negotiating with the ILA, however, meant an endless se-
140 • Chapter 6
ries of distractions. With almost no warning, the union 
scheduled a membership vote for September 14—two 
weeks ahead of contract expiration—on whether the 
ILA should affiliate with the national AFL- CIO labor 
federation, six years after the old American Federation 
of Labor had expelled it for corruption. All other busi-
ness was suspended while union leaders tried to convince 
members to vote yes. Only after the referendum’s narrow 
passage did contract negotiations resume, just a few days 
before the September 30, 1959, expiration date. The 
talks had a positive tone, and, with details unsettled a 
few hours before the contract expired, Gleason and New 
York Shipping Association president Alexander Chopin 
agreed on a fifteen- day extension. Field protested that 
the extension violated the ILA’s long- standing credo, “no 
contract, no work,” and his Manhattan local promptly 
went on strike. A few hours later, after separate negotia-
tions covering southern ports failed, longshoremen from 
North Carolina to Texas walked out. Faced with two 
uprisings, Gleason canceled the contract extension and 
endorsed a strike—only to run afoul of powerful Brook-
lyn ILA boss Anthony Anastasia. Anastasia, a volatile 
Italian immigrant with no love for Gleason and the other 
Irishmen who dominated the ILA’s leadership, directed 
his own members to work and accused Gleason of back-
ing the strike only to benefit Field. A court temporarily 
ended the chaos on October 6 by ordering the ports re-
opened for at least eighty days.
7
The employer side was no more united than the union. 
Every ship line had its own plans for automation, and the 
only company that truly understood the container busi-
ness, Pan- Atlantic, was not at the bargaining table. When 
Union Disunion • 141
serious negotiations resumed at the start of November, 
the Shipping Association rejected the union’s proposal to 
strip and stuff all containers at the pier, but agreed to a 
container tax to compensate longshoremen hurt by con-
tainerization. The details proved sticky. The employers 
offered severance pay for displaced dockers. The union 
wanted a guarantee of dockworkers’ incomes instead; it 
dismissed severance pay as impractical because, in an 
industry where workers were hired by the day, automa-
tion was likely to mean less work for everyone rather 
than total unemployment for some.
The outcome, in December 1959, was a three- year 
contract stating that New York employers would have 
the right to automate in return for protecting longshore-
men’s incomes. Beyond that broad principle, all details 
were left to arbitration. “What the shippers did was give 
us a piece of the pie,” one ILA leader crowed. “Their sav-
ings with containers will be tremendous and they just 
passed on some of the cash to us.” The Shipping Associa-
tion told a similar story. “The steamship industry and 
shippers are in a position for the first time to fully test 
and evaluate the economies that might result from these 
new developments,” Shipping Association president Vin-
cent Barnett wrote his members. Civic boosters, long 
preoccupied by the decline of New York’s docks, touted 
the pact as the instrument of the port’s salvation. The 
new contract “may give New York a jump on competing 
ports in developing the use of huge containers in inter -
national shipping,” the Herald Tribune explained. The 
New York Times thought that it “should open the door 
to a flood of containers.”
8
142 • Chapter 6
The flood did not come, because nothing had been 
agreed but generalities. Three arbitrators, including Glea-
son, a management representative, and a neutral third 
member, spent months pondering the details, trying to 
navigate between the ship lines’ concern that a royalty on 
each container would “become another long- term mort-
gage on the industry” and the ILA’s worry that the carri-
ers would find ways to avoid paying royalties. Finally, in 
the autumn of 1960, the arbitrators ruled by a two- to- 
one vote that employers in the Port of New York could 
use container- handling equipment without restriction—
in return for paying $1.00 per ton for every container 
moving on a containership, $0.70 per ton for each con-
tainer on ships designed both for containers and mixed 
freight, and $0.35 per ton for containers being carried on 
conventional breakbulk ships. As a sop to the union, the 
arbitrators dictated that when ship lines or stevedore 
companies stuffed or unstuffed containers at their own 
terminals, they would have to employ ILA labor.9
With the 1960 arbitration award, the Port of New 
York was officially open to any ship line wishing to carry 
freight in containers. The reality was otherwise. The ar-
bitrators had ordered that the container royalties be paid 
into a fund, but they had refused to say anything about 
how the fund should be spent. In addition, the arbitra-
tors had neglected to define the term “container.” Glea-
son, the union’s representative on the arbitration panel, 
predicted that these omissions would cause further 
union- management conflict. He was right.
The ILA’s Pacific Coast counterpart, the International 
Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union, took an 
Union Disunion • 143
entirely different tack in addressing waterfront auto-
mation.
The ILWU had a long history of difficult and at times 
violent relations with employers in the Pacific ports. The 
union, then the Pacific division of the ILA, gained recog-
nition only after a bloody coastwide strike in 1934, and 
staged 1,399 legal and illegal stoppages over the next 
fourteen years in order to assert its rights. The net result 
of this constant conflict was a large body of rules, both 
written and unwritten, governing port operations in 
great detail. One formal rule provided that, once as -
signed to a job at a particular hatch of a particular ship, 
a worker would do only that specific job until the ship 
sailed; if loading was complete at one hatch but not at 
another, an idle worker from the first hatch could not be 
shifted to help out at the second. An important “hip 
pocket” rule, codified nowhere but enforced by the gang 
foreman as required, provided that a trucker delivering 
palletized cargo to a pier would have to remove each 
item from the pallet and place it on the dock. Longshore-
men would then replace the items on the pallet for lower-
ing into the hold, where other longshoremen would 
break down the pallet once more and stow each indi -
vidual item—all at a cost so high that shippers knew not 
to send pallets to begin with.
10
Developing such rules, a top ILWU official admitted 
later, “took no end of imagination and invention.” The 
union regarded them as indispensable to preserve jobs 
and maintain uniform costs among competitors. The ste-
vedoring firms with which the ILWU negotiated were 
willing to accept the rules to avoid the alternative of 
endless wildcat strikes. Louis Goldblatt, the union’s 
144 • Chapter 6
longtime secretary- treasurer, claimed that the stevedores 
actually liked many of the rules, because the ship lines 
paid them a premium of 30 percent for each man- hour 
worked. Perversely, the more man- hours required to dis-
charge and load a ship, the more profit the stevedore 
could make.11
The other reason strict work rules were accepted is 
that there was little choice. The stevedores’ association 
had attempted to loosen many of the rules in contract 
negotiations in 1948. Unwisely, it did so by mounting a 
personal attack on Harry Bridges. The union president, 
a political radical from his Australian youth, made no 
secret of his socialist sympathies, and the employers la-
beled him a Communist and declared that they would 
not deal with Communists. By so doing, they merely en-
hanced his reputation on the docks. The ILWU walked 
out when the contract expired, and the union’s leader -
ship was so successful in promoting solidarity that mem-
bers stayed out through a ninety- five- day strike. Finally, 
the major ship lines brought the conflict to an end by 
pushing aside the stevedores’ association and their own 
rabidly anti- Communist counsel and taking charge of 
negotiations. The union achieved its greatest desire: it 
was finally able to negotiate face- to- face with the ship 
operators that ultimately paid for its services, rather than 
with the financially tenuous middlemen at the stevedor-
ing companies.12
The largest of the Pacific ship lines, Matson, was fac-
ing a financial squeeze, and it persuaded the others that 
it was time for “a new look” in labor- management rela-
tions. The companies agreed to leave the work rules 
Union Disunion • 145
alone, in return for a contract clause allowing stevedores 
to use new devices and methods so long as individual 
workers did not face speedups. Innovation would no 
longer automatically trigger a strike. If a gang thought it 
was being asked to perform dangerous or excessive tasks, 
a union representative and a supervisor would try to 
work things out while unloading or loading continued; 
if no settlement could be reached at the job site, the dis-
pute would move quickly to higher levels and, if needed, 
to binding arbitration. These provisions created a new 
openness, with the union frequently bending the rules to 
permit new equipment and smaller gangs so long as 
workers received a portion of the savings. Faced with 
cargo volumes one- quarter smaller than before the war, 
the ILWU, in the words of two California labor experts, 
accepted that “radical measures were necessary to halt 
the decline in maritime commerce.”13
The amount of cargo handled per man- hour through 
the early 1950s, however, remained dismally low. A con-
gressional investigation of the ports of Los Angeles and 
Long Beach in 1955 uncovered such informal practices 
as “four- on, four- off,” a custom that had begun as a brief 
rest break for half of the eight holdmen in each gang and 
had expanded to the extent that workers often worked 
for only half of their shifts. The investigation left the 
ILWU cornered and friendless. It had long been plagued 
by allegations that it was a Communist front, and the 
government had sought repeatedly to deport Bridges, 
notwithstanding his status as a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
The Congress of Industrial Organizations, the leftist side 
of the labor movement, had expelled it for alleged Com-
146 • Chapter 6
munist ties in 1951, and after the AFL and the CIO 
merged in 1955, Bridges was fearful that the Teamsters 
and other AFL- CIO unions would seek to challenge its 
jurisdiction over the docks. Even its former parent union, 
the ILA, wanted nothing to do with the ILWU, despite its 
own isolation from the rest of the labor movement; when 
Bridges wrote ILA president William Bradley to offer 
support during the 1956 East Coast dock strike, Bradley 
fired back that Bridges’s support was undesired. Bridges, 
a sophisticated tactician, was painfully aware of his 
union’s vulnerability to government pressure, and he 
knew that ending contract abuses and improving pro -
ductivity were essential to keep the government out of 
union affairs. “You have got our promise and the em -
ployers have got our promise that we will go down there 
[to the rank and file] and persuade and push and do our 
best,” Bridges told the congressional committee.
14
The impending launch of Pan- Atlantic’s container ser-
vice in the East, and the ongoing study of container usage 
by Matson, the largest West Coast ship line, made it clear 
that shipowners were intent on automating cargo han -
dling. Although many members of his union opposed 
concessions of any sort, Bridges, protected by his creden-
tials as a militant uncorrupted by his dealings with the 
bosses, began to argue publicly that the union needed to 
think ahead. “Those guys who think we can go on hold-
ing back mechanization are still back in the thirties, 
fighting the fight we won way back then,” he said.15
The union’s origins in the West’s turn- of- the- century 
labor radicalism, its remarkable victories in the strikes of 
1934 and 1948, and its leaders’ ideology all gave the 
rank and file unusual power within the ILWU. A change 
Union Disunion • 147
in the union’s position on work rules and automation 
could not be imposed from the top; it would have to be 
endorsed by the coastwide caucus of representatives 
elected by their local unions, and then approved by a 
vote of the entire longshore membership. The task of 
selling the need for a new approach fell to Bridges. He 
first presented the issue to the union’s negotiating com-
mittee, of which he was a member. In March 1956, as the 
ILWU caucus debated priorities for the upcoming con -
tract negotiations, the negotiating committee urged that 
the union accept automation in return for higher wages 
and shorter working hours:
Much of our past effort has gone into a somewhat un-
successful attempt to retard the wheels of industrial 
mechanization progress. In many cases, these efforts 
have only resulted in our eventual acceptance of the new 
device, accompanied by our loss of jurisdiction over the 
new work involved. . . . We believe that it is possible 
to encourage mechanization in the industry and at the 
same time establish and reaffirm our work jurisdiction, 
along with practical minimal manning scales, so that the 
ILWU will have all of the work from the railroad tracks 
outside the piers into the holds of the ships.
16
This point of view was highly controversial within the 
union. The 1948 contract had left the ILWU firmly in 
control of the docks in almost every Pacific port. All 
longshoremen were either full ILWU “A- men” or else “B- 
men” who were hired as extras when all the A- men were 
employed, and hoped to get enough experience to be 
admitted to the union as A- men themselves. Most A- men 
belonged to regular gangs, with the same group dis -
148 • Chapter 6
patched together from the hiring hall under its elected 
gang boss, who was also a union member. The handling 
of each ship was supervised by a walking boss, an ILWU 
member as well. The stevedoring companies’ superinten-
dents, nominally in charge, understood that it was usu-
ally wiser to get along with the union than to insist on 
strict enforcement of the contract. This cozy arrange -
ment, which gave the longshoremen unusual control 
over their workplace, seemed to be threatened by the 
joint “Statement of Principles” put forth by the ILWU 
and the Pacific Maritime Association at the start of their 
1956 negotiations. The key provision read simply: 
“There shall be no requirement for employment of un-
necessary men.”
17
Bridges put the “Statement of Principles” to a mem -
bership vote and received only a tepid endorsement, with 
40 percent of ILWU members voting no. He clearly had 
no mandate to agree to changes in manning require -
ments. Instead, the union and the Maritime Association 
signed a contract dealing with normal economic matters, 
and arranged to address mechanization and work rules 
in separate talks.
Those talks began early in 1957 but quickly foun -
dered on employers’ complaints that union members 
were ignoring the existing contract. J. Paul St. Sure, head 
of the Pacific Maritime Association, made clear that the 
shipowners were unwilling to trade money for elimina-
tion of work rules until they were certain that Bridges 
could make ILWU locals live up to whatever bargain he 
struck. That hard- nosed stance led to a year of intense 
debate among centralizers and decentralizers within the 
ILWU. In a surprising speech to the union’s caucus in 
Union Disunion • 149
April 1957, Bridges demanded that locals abide by con-
tract language and improve productivity. Opposition, 
though, was still too strong to overcome; automation 
issues were referred to the Coast Labor Committee for 
further study. The committee, consisting of Bridges, one 
member from the Northwest, and one from California, 
reported to another union caucus in Portland in October 
that shippers were increasingly demanding to pack their 
own cargo into pallets, vans, or other loads that would 
be handled as single units on the docks. It estimated that 
up to 11 percent of longshore work hours could be lost 
as these practices spread. “There is nothing, except our 
willingness to handle them, that prevents a very consid-
erable increase in unit loads, made up by the shipper,” 
the committee wrote. It painted a stark choice: “Do we 
want to stick with our present policy of guerilla resis -
tance or do we want to adopt a more flexible policy in 
order to buy more specific benefits in return?”
18
The report opened the way to a remarkable debate 
among rank- and- file members at the caucus. For the first 
time, men from up and down the coast had a chance to 
learn in detail about the changes under way in the ship-
ping industry. “Every longshoreman started talking 
about what can be done under mechanization and still 
maintain jobs and income, benefits, pensions, and so 
forth,” recalled a labor journalist who was on the scene. 
Delegates from Los Angeles and Long Beach, where 
practices such as needlessly unloading and reloading pal-
lets were most entrenched, opposed any compromise. 
“Perhaps we have the most to lose of any local on the 
coast,” one Los Angeles delegate complained. Delegates 
from Bridges’s home local in San Francisco led the sup-
150 • Chapter 6
port for negotiations over automation, arguing that the 
union should make sure that members shared the bene-
fits of new methods of work rather than trying to stop 
them. After two days of debate, a voice vote backed 
Bridges’s proposal to begin informal negotiations about 
automation. On November 19, the union wrote the Pa-
cific Maritime Association offering to discuss new meth-
ods and elimination of work rules, with the desire “to 
preserve the present registered force of longshoremen as 
the basic work force in the industry, and to share with 
that force a portion of the net labor cost saving to be 
effected.”19
Again, the employers were less than enthusiastic. 
“Many of them felt that this was a form of bribing the 
men on the job to do the job they were hired to do in the 
first place,” St. Sure explained. Bridges and St. Sure, who 
had developed a close working relationship, decided that 
the automation issues were too complex to resolve be -
fore the contract expired in June 1958, so they put their 
immediate focus on one very fundamental change in the 
contract. The union had won a six- hour workday in 
1934, but an unwritten rule prohibited an employer 
from calling a halt after six hours if loading or unloading 
was not finished; although the contract guaranteed a 
minimum of only four hours’ pay when a longshoreman 
was hired, a “normal” shift was nine hours—six at 
straight time and three at time- and- a- half. The contract 
Bridges and St. Sure negotiated in 1958 turned longshor-
ing into regular, full- time work. Longshoremen were 
guaranteed a full eight hours’ pay each day—at straight 
time. This benefited some men but hurt others, because 
the loss of overtime hours paid at 150 percent of base 
Union Disunion • 151
wage meant less income for many workers. Only 56 per-
cent of ILA members voted to ratify the contract.20
The start of Matson Navigation’s West Coast–Hawaii 
service in 1959 made negotiations about automation ur-
gent. “There were specialized cranes that were built spe-
cifically for Matson’s operation,” a former Los Angeles 
longshoreman recalled. “Well, after the worker saw that, 
or read about it in the Dispatcher [the ILWU newspaper], 
it didn’t take long to sink in that this was the coming way 
the cargo was going to be moved.” The leadership warned 
the union caucus in April of “such rapid changes in ship-
ping that within even a few years the industry might take 
on a completely new appearance.” The Pacific Maritime 
Association, though, downplayed the risk of job loss. 
“We feel it will be years before the present work force 
will be affected at all by automation,” St. Sure told ILWU 
negotiators in May 1959. Bridges apparently shared that 
view. “Harry didn’t seem to believe that containerization 
was going to be that important,” said the Dispatcher ’s 
former editor.21
Against that background, the employers made a con-
crete offer in 1959: in return for the elimination of work 
rules, they would guarantee that all A- men who had been 
on the roster in 1958 would at least equal their 1958 
earnings in future years, and that employment would 
shrink only as longshoremen quit or retired. The union 
produced a counteroffer in November. In return for each 
man- hour saved by more efficient methods of cargo han-
dling, it asked the employers to pay one hour’s average 
wage into a compensation fund. Trouble was, no one 
knew how much money might be involved. St. Sure fi -
nally grabbed a number out of thin air and offered the 
152 • Chapter 6
union $1 million in compensation for all work that 
might be lost owing to automation prior to June 1960. 
Bridges naturally asked for more, making a counteroffer 
of $1.5 million, and a temporary deal was struck. In re-
turn for $1.5 million and a guarantee that no A- men 
would be laid off, the union agreed that the employers 
had the right to change methods of work over the com-
ing months. Negotiations on a permanent arrangement 
would continue.
22
Months of serious study and dialogue ensued, involv-
ing the ILWU, the Pacific Maritime Association, and a 
variety of dissident factions within both groups. When 
formal negotiations reopened on May 17, 1960, St. Sure 
announced that the employers would not sign another 
interim agreement on automation; they wanted a com-
plete contract. The union again proposed that employers 
contribute to a worker compensation fund based on 
man- hours saved. The ship lines had supported just such 
a concept in 1959. Now, however, they changed their 
tune, offering flat annual payments to buy out the old 
work rules for a fixed price, with no obligation to share 
future cost savings. Three days later, Bridges accepted the 
idea in principle. The union threw a figure on the table: 
$5 million per year over four years, an amount equiva-
lent to about twenty cents each year for each man- hour 
worked in 1959.
23
Dozens of bargaining sessions followed before the 
landmark Mechanization and Modernization Agree -
ment was finally signed on October 18, 1960. On the 
management side, small coastal carriers, Japanese steam-
ship lines, and stevedoring companies all demanded ex-
emptions from contributing to the guarantee fund, and 
Union Disunion • 153
St. Sure had to threaten resignation to obtain unanimous 
support from the Pacific Maritime Association’s execu-
tive committee. The political problems on the union side 
were even worse. The ILWU local in San Francisco had 
agreed to terms for handling Matson’s new container -
ship, Hawaiian Citizen, but when the vessel called at Los 
Angeles in August 1960, just as the mechanization talks 
were reaching a critical stage, ILWU Local 13 refused to 
work the ship. The Maritime Association promptly shut 
the entire port, and several ship lines threatened to move 
next door to Long Beach, where a different union local 
held sway. The Los Angeles Board of Supervisors re -
sponded with a proposed ordinance making port em -
ployees civil servants with no right to strike, an idea that 
was anathema to the ILWU. Bridges was forced to crack 
down hard on Local 13. Port, union, and Maritime As-
sociation officials signed an unusual agreement setting 
out penalties for men who refused to work as directed. 
St. Sure and Bridges made a joint appearance before the 
Board of Supervisors promising to install a full- time ar-
bitrator to deal quickly with any labor disputes in the 
port. The Los Angeles docks reopened within a couple of 
weeks, but bad feelings lingered between the ILWU’s 
local officials and its international leaders.24
Two months later, when the draft Mechanization and 
Modernization Agreement was presented to the ILWU’s 
October caucus, delegates knew that it meant the end of 
an era. “It is the intent of this document that the con -
tract, working and dispatching rules shall not be con -
strued so as to require the hiring of unnecessary men,” 
read the key clause. The word “container” did not ap -
pear, but the language gave management the right to 
154 • Chapter 6
change working methods for all types of cargo so long 
as this did not result in unsafe conditions or “onerous” 
workloads; the union could file a grievance if it believed 
conditions were onerous. The ILWU retained control of 
cargo sorting on the dock, but containers and pallets ar-
riving at the dock fully loaded would no longer be emp-
tied and repacked by longshoremen.
In return for near- total flexibility, the employers 
agreed to pay $5 million per year. Part of the money 
would support retirement: longshoremen with 25 years 
of service would receive $7,920, or approximately 70 
weeks’ base pay, upon retirement at age 65, plus the 
$100 monthly ILWU pension. Workers aged 62 to 65 
would be paid $220 a month until age 65 if they would 
retire early. The rest of the money guaranteed all A- men 
average weekly earnings equivalent to 35 hours of work, 
whether or not their services were needed on the docks. 
Anyone hired as a longshoreman after the agreement 
was signed would never be eligible for the guarantee be-
cause, as a union spokesman explained, “they will not 
have given up anything.”25
The caucus demanded numerous changes before send-
ing the draft for a membership vote. More than one- third 
of the ILWU’s members voted no. Some opponents, such 
as San Francisco’s famed longshoreman- philosopher 
Eric Hoffer, were outraged on ideological grounds. “This 
generation has no right to give away, or sell for money, 
conditions that were handed on to us by a previous gen-
eration,” Hoffer stormed. Dockers in Los Angeles, still 
angry that Bridges had interfered in their local labor dis-
pute and upset about the loss of work unstuffing and 
Union Disunion • 155
restuffing containers, rejected it by nearly two to one. 
The local in Seattle backed Bridges; so did his home local 
in San Francisco, where the unusually old workforce—
nearly two- thirds of San Francisco longshoremen were 
45 or older—liked the retirement provisions. Members 
in those two cities provided most of the votes to approve 
the contract.
26
The Mechanization and Modernization Agreement 
brought surprises all around. The initial result, predict-
ably, was a wave of retirements. With incentives encour-
aging older longshoremen to leave the workforce, the 
number over age 65 fell from 831 in 1960 to 321 in 
1964, and the number between 60 and 65 dropped by 
one- fifth. Contrary to expectations on both sides, though, 
income guarantees for active dockers proved unneces-
sary. Rather than a labor surplus, the docks experienced 
a labor shortage thanks to an increasing flow of cargo. 
Large numbers of B- men were admitted as A- men for the 
first time in years.
27
The agreement delivered everything the ship lines had 
hoped for in terms of productivity. Labor productivity 
had been flat for nearly two decades prior to 1960. The 
employers’ new ability to change work methods for non-
containerized cargo drove up tonnage per man- hour 41 
percent in five years, and overall productivity, adjusted 
for changes in the mix of cargo, doubled within eight 
years. Shippers could send their canned goods, bagged 
rice, flour, and similar products on pallets without hav-
ing to pay longshoremen to unpack and repack the pal-
lets. Iron and steel were handled by two men on the dock 
156 • Chapter 6
rather than four or six, and six cotton bales were now 
sent for export prepacked on a single pallet weighing 
3,000 pounds—too heavy under the old rules, but per -
missible under the new. Tonnage per man- hour in sugar 
rose 74 percent between 1960 and 1963, in lumber 53 
percent, in rice 130 percent. In the agreement’s third year, 
West Coast ports used 2.5 million fewer man- hours of 
labor than the previous contract would have required, a 
figure equal to 8 percent of all the labor those ports had 
employed in 1960.
28
Contrary to the union’s expectations, these massive 
productivity gains came from sweat, not automation. 
“The evidence suggests that the employers, for the most 
part, devoted their effort to trying to squeeze more physi-
cal labor from the workforce, rather than innovating or 
undertaking new investment,” wrote economist Paul 
Hartman after a careful analysis of the trends. Sacks 
grew larger, and sling loads, no longer bound by the for-
mer weight limit of 2,100 pounds, increased to as much 
as 4,000 pounds. The result was much harder physical 
work for the men in the hold, who had to shove these 
heavy loads into place. Extremely large sling loads, long 
prohibited by contract, were soon known on the docks 
as “Bridges loads.”
29
Bizarrely, the parties now switched sides. The union 
demanded that the employers mechanize faster to elimi-
nate these physical burdens. “We intend to push to make 
the addition of machines compulsory,” Harry Bridges 
told management negotiators in 1963. “The days of 
sweating on these jobs should be gone and that is our 
objective.” The ship lines were hesitant to spend the 
Union Disunion • 157
money. The ILWU responded by filing grievances against 
the lack of machinery on docks and in holds. After one 
of the strangest arbitration proceedings ever to occur  
in any industry, the employers were ordered in June  
1965 to provide longshoremen with more forklifts and 
winches.
30
Through 1966, West Coast shipping interests paid 
$29 million into funds that provided early retirement, 
death, and disability benefits, along with wage supple -
ments to displaced longshoremen. This proved to be a 
hugely profitable investment. In 1965 alone, by one esti-
mate, the ship lines saved $59.4 million owing to the 
Mechanization and Modernization Agreement, nearly 
twelve times their annual payment. The improved effi -
ciency, which contributed to a surge in carriers’ profits, 
came at a time when the container had barely begun to 
make itself felt in the Pacific ports. Container shipments 
accounted for a scant 1.5 percent of all general- cargo 
tonnage at Pacific Coast ports in 1960 and less than 5 
percent in 1963. When the container finally arrived in 
force, leading to unimagined productivity increases, it 
brought yet more surprises. The Port of Los Angeles, 
where longshoremen had been so certain that automa -
tion would destroy jobs, was to flourish beyond all ex-
pectations, while the Port of San Francisco, whose long-
shoremen had been the strongest proponents of the 
Mechanization and Modernization Agreement, would 
wither. As they negotiated over automation in 1960, 
though, neither management nor labor was able to fore-
tell what the container would do. The law of unantici-
pated consequences prevailed. As Bridges confessed later, 
158 • Chapter 6
“Frankly speaking, the ILWU was caught off guard, as 
were many shipping companies.”31
The Mechanization and Modernization Agreement set 
the rules for the U.S. Pacific Coast and was immediately 
extended to western Canada. In the East, the politics of 
the fractious International Longshoremen’s Association 
would not allow such a sweeping settlement of automa-
tion issues. The ILA represented longshoremen from 
Maine to Texas, but it negotiated separately with differ-
ent groups of employers up and down the coast. There 
was no coastwide contract such as there was in the West. 
Nor was there a Harry Bridges, a union leader trusted 
and respected enough to win member support for an 
otherwise suspect deal. The ILA’s headquarters had mini-
mal power over local union leaders, who could do pretty 
much as they pleased. “It is the only anarchist union,” 
columnist Murray Kempton wrote aptly in the New 
York Post.32
William Bradley, the ILA’s president from 1953 
through 1963, was a genial man who took the title “cap-
tain” from his days as a tugboat operator. He was named 
to head the union after longtime president Joseph Ryan 
was forced out on corruption charges in 1953. Having 
never worked the docks, Bradley won little respect 
among longshoremen in Brooklyn and Manhattan, much 
less those in Houston and Savannah. In 1961, dissidents 
demanding strict contract enforcement and maintenance 
of twenty- one- man gangs won union posts at Anthony 
Anastasia’s Local 1814 in Brooklyn. In the midst of con-
tract negotiations the following year, the choleric Anas-
tasia tried to withdraw his local from the ILA and bar -
Union Disunion • 159
gain on independently. Bradley relied on Teddy Gleason, 
officially the union’s chief organizer and executive vice 
president, to sort out such internal political complica -
tions as well as relations with employers. Gleason, who 
had once been a pier supervisor—a management job—
had the waterfront in his blood; his father and grandfa-
ther had both been longshoremen, and he and his twelve 
siblings had been raised a few blocks from the docks in 
lower Manhattan. His longshore work, though, had 
been as a checker counting cargo, not as a holdman 
physically lifting coffee and cement. The Irishmen among 
his rank and file were not sure that he was tough enough, 
and the Italians and blacks, the other main ethnic groups 
working the docks, were not sure they wanted yet an -
other Irish American leader. This was not an environ -
ment in which bargainers could make progress on a sub-
ject as emotional as automation.
33
The union’s internal political problems were rooted in 
unpleasant economic realities. Although the port as a 
whole was prospering, Manhattan’s piers were not. The 
number of men hired at the five Manhattan hiring halls 
fell 20 percent from 1957–58 through 1961–62, while 
hiring in Brooklyn and New Jersey increased. Urban re-
development projects, such as the proposed World Trade 
Center, threatened the removal of piers that would never 
be replaced, and the congestion along the entire Hudson 
River waterfront made it obviously unsuitable for new 
container operations. Brooklyn longshoremen, by con -
trast, saw no immediate threat to their jobs. Container 
operations had not even begun in many ports, including 
Philadelphia and Boston, and therefore were not a prior-
ity for local leaders. With these very different situations 
160 • Chapter 6
leading powerful local presidents to stake out differing 
views, the ILA had great difficulty coming up with a 
united approach to the container.34
The arbitrators’ temporary compromise of 1960, pro-
tecting jobs but allowing the employers unlimited use of 
containers and machinery in return for payments into a 
royalty fund, barely mattered. A royalty board was set 
up to manage the expected flood of money, but a drop 
in port traffic during the economic slowdown of 1960–
61 meant that there was little by way of royalties. Glea-
son alleged that other ship lines were trying to evade 
royalty payments by encouraging shippers to pack their 
cargo on pallets rather than in containers. “This is a 
clear- cut threat to our existing collective bargaining 
agreement and to the royalty program,” he charged in 
late 1961. Longshore hours worked in December 1961 
were down 4 percent from the previous year and down 
20 percent from December 1956, but there was still no 
compensation being paid out to the men whose work 
had diminished.35
Job security in the face of automation thus became the 
overwhelming union concern as contract negotiations 
began in 1962. Job security, though, played differently 
in different places. New York leader Frank Field de -
manded that the ILA negotiate for a portwide seniority 
system: business at his own Local 858’s docks, in lower 
Manhattan, was drying up, but the customary pier- 
specific seniority meant that displaced Manhattan long-
shoremen could not easily find work on other piers. The 
leaders of other locals had no desire to reduce their own 
members’ job security by giving Field’s members priority 
in hiring.
36
Union Disunion • 161
Those internal divisions were all too apparent as the 
ILA entered negotiations for the 1962 contract. The 
union opened with demands that all New York long -
shoremen involved in handling prepacked cargo of any 
sort receive an extra two dollars per hour, and that all 
containers be assessed a penalty of two dollars per ton 
payable to the royalty fund. Anastasia, whose Brooklyn 
local had seen little impact from containers, publicly 
criticized his own union’s proposals as ridiculous and 
again threatened to withdraw from the ILA. The Ship -
ping Association simply ignored the union’s demands, 
instead proposing that ship lines be allowed to handle 
containers with eight- man gangs and other cargo with 
gangs of sixteen, and that crane operators be removed 
from the union’s jurisdiction. These changes, multiplied 
by the 560 gangs in the port, would have been cataclys-
mic for the ILA. Economic consultant Walter Eisenberg 
warned Gleason that the employers’ proposal would lead 
to a sharp increase in container traffic and would save 
employers between $108 million and $144 million over 
the life of a three- year contract. The union thought that 
this money rightfully belonged to its members, but the 
employers considered it the unearned fruits of feather -
bedding, to which workers had no claim. The talks 
stalled, even with federal mediation, because Gleason 
lacked the political strength to agree to any contract that 
would eliminate work. The union, he pledged to his angry 
members, would “not sell out jobs like Bridges did.”37
Neither side was prepared for anything like the Mech-
anization and Modernization Agreement on the West 
Coast. After high- level political soundings in Washing-
ton, the mediators proposed that the ILA and the New 
162 • Chapter 6
York Shipping Association sign a one- year contract while 
undertaking a joint study of automation and job security. 
The Shipping Association agreed reluctantly. The union 
refused, and a strike closed the entire port at the end of 
September 1962. President Kennedy ordered the union 
back to work for an eighty- day “cooling- off period” and 
named three professors to investigate the dispute. Like 
the federal mediators a month earlier, the professors sug-
gested a joint labor- management study. The employers 
refused unless the union agreed not to strike during the 
year. The ILA wanted no study that might cost jobs in 
the long run. The mediators’ hint that the employers 
might eventually reduce the workforce by paying work-
ers to retire made Gleason irate. “We don’t want to sell 
jobs,” he insisted in late October. “The West Coast sold 
their men out, but here on the East and Gulf Coast, we 
don’t do that.” The professors withdrew. Two days be-
fore Christmas 1962, the cooling- off period expired, and 
the union walked out once again.
38
Kennedy named three men to try to mediate: Republi-
can senator Wayne Morse, who had formerly worked as 
a labor mediator; Harvard Business School professor 
James Healy; and Theodore Kheel, a New York labor 
lawyer. On January 20, 1963, nearly a month into the 
strike, they announced a proposal: the union would get 
a one- year contract with large pay and benefit increases, 
and the secretary of labor would study the job security 
issues and make recommendations. The ILA and the 
Shipping Association would attempt to implement the 
recommendations, but if they failed, they would select a 
neutral board to do the job. Superficially, the plan seemed 
to favor the union; the employers faced a large increase 
Union Disunion • 163
in wage and benefit costs with no assurance of greater 
productivity. Gleason criticized the proposal, then ac -
cepted it, while the Shipping Association futilely objected. 
The union, seemingly victorious, returned to work.
The appearance of a union victory was misleading. A 
separate statement by the mediators could be read in no 
other way than as a warning to the ILA: “We wish . . . to 
emphasize our strong belief that the capacity of this in-
dustry to support wages and benefits to which the em-
ployees are entitled cannot continue without serious im-
pairment in the absence of marked improvement in 
manpower utilization.” The implication was that if the 
union remained unwilling to make a deal on containers, 
the government stood ready to impose one.
39
As the Labor Department studied port automation 
through the rest of 1963, the ILA endured yet another 
internecine feud. Gleason, officially the executive vice 
president but clearly the union’s most powerful figure, 
launched a campaign to replace Bradley as president. The 
hapless Bradley, nominally the boss, accused Gleason of 
having subjected the union to an “unnecessary strike” 
over automation. Gleason was not wildly popular, but 
even his critics acknowledged the need for a strong hand 
at the helm, and the union convention kicked Bradley 
into the new post of president emeritus. With Manhattan 
local leader John Bowers elected to Gleason’s old job 
over the head of the Negro local in Mobile, George 
Dixon, the ILA remained under New York Irish domina-
tion as it faced the container issue head- on.
If Gleason’s ascent altered the bargaining environ-
ment, so did the continuing decline of New York City’s 
docks. With containers accounting in 1963 for more 
164 • Chapter 6
than 10 percent of the entire port’s general cargo for the 
first time, and with Robert Wagner, the mayor who had 
made the docks a priority, preparing to retire, resolving 
the container situation became urgent for the New York 
contingent within the ILA. Fear that automation would 
destroy the union was the major issue at a conference of 
the ILA’s southern locals in June 1964. When the Depart-
ment of Labor released its study of the Port of New York 
at the start of July, Gleason offered an unexpected re -
sponse: “The time may well be ripe to institute in this 
industry a guaranteed annual wage.”40
The 1964 contract negotiations took on an unusually 
conciliatory tone. The New York Shipping Association 
proposed smaller gangs and more flexibility in work as-
signments, as the Labor Department report urged. In re-
turn, it offered increased pensions and early retirement, 
a guarantee that each man hired would get eight hours’ 
work, severance pay for men permanently displaced, and 
an annual income guarantee for regular longshoremen. 
When the ILA rejected any concessions on gang sizes, 
federal mediators were requested once more. The media-
tors named by President Johnson in January 1964 urged 
that employers fund a guaranteed income for permanent 
longshoremen who showed their availability for work. 
In return, the mediators proposed that employers be per-
mitted to transfer workers from hatch to hatch, and from 
one task to another, and that the size of general- cargo 
gangs be pared to seventeen men by 1967. Gleason was 
willing to concede smaller gangs, but the proposal to let 
workers do multiple jobs sparked outrage among the 
checkers, who feared that their less strenuous record- 
keeping jobs might vanish. Against his own desires, Glea-
Union Disunion • 165
son was forced to take the union out on strike again in 
September 1964.41
The Johnson administration, increasingly concerned 
about inflationary labor settlements, ordered the dockers 
back to work and imposed an eighty- day cooling- off pe-
riod. This time, the ILA and the New York Shipping As-
sociation negotiated without the usual histrionics. In 
return for a massive wage and benefit increase all along 
the coast, including three additional paid holidays and a 
fourth week’s vacation, the union agreed to reduce the 
gang size for all general cargo, including containers, to 
seventeen men by 1967. Starting in 1966, employers in 
New York would pay a royalty on every container pass-
ing through the port, with the funds to be used to guar-
antee qualified longshoremen the equivalent of sixteen 
hundred hours of work each year so long as they checked 
in at the hiring hall, even if they rarely got hired. This 
Guaranteed Annual Income would be paid until retire-
ment age, creating a permanent subsidy for displaced 
dockers. A union flyer summed up the huge changes that 
the new contract would bring: “This agreement takes the 
industry from a completely casual workforce to a stable, 
secure livelihood.”
42
Where the ILA was concerned, though, nothing was 
ever simple. Just before Christmas, as the cooling- off pe-
riod expired, wildcat strikes began in Baltimore, Galves-
ton, and New York. Then, in a secret ballot on January 
8, 1965, ILA members in New York shocked the union 
leadership by rejecting the new contract, income guaran-
tees and all. Gleason scheduled a revote, but not before 
hiring a public relations firm and, in an extraordinary act 
for the head of a secretive union, going on the radio to 
166 • Chapter 6
explain the contract. The second time around, ILA mem-
bers in New York voted yes, but the next day members 
in Baltimore voted no. A separate dispute broke out in 
Philadelphia, followed by an unrelated ILA walkout in 
most ports in the South. Not until March 1965 were new 
contracts establishing a guaranteed annual income in 
place in New York and Philadelphia. The way for con-
tainerization was clear—in two ports. In most other cit-
ies along the East and Gulf coasts, containerization had 
not even been addressed.
43
The Mechanization and Modernization Agreement on 
the Pacific Coast and the Guaranteed Annual Income in 
the North Atlantic were among the most unusual, and 
most controversial, labor arrangements in the history of 
American business. They were products of a time in 
which the permanent disappearance of work owing to 
automation was a matter for thoughtful discussion. The 
U.S. government, particularly the Department of Labor, 
was undertaking serious studies of automation’s impact 
in hopes of better assisting affected workers, and organi-
zations such as the American Foundation on Automation 
and Employment were holding much noticed confer -
ences. President Kennedy addressed the issue himself in 
1962: “I regard it as the major domestic challenge, really, 
of the 60s, to maintain full employment, at a time when 
automation, of course, is replacing men.”
44
For organized labor, automation was a front- burner 
issue. Two- thirds of the labor leaders responding to a 
survey identified it as unions’ most serious concern. Au-
tomation is “rapidly becoming a curse to this society,” 
AFL- CIO president George Meany told the labor federa-
Union Disunion • 167
tion’s annual convention in 1963. The substitution of 
machinery for manpower was threatening to unions, 
blurring long- established jurisdictional lines and raising 
bargaining costs by reducing the number of workers in 
a plant, and displacement could be devastating to work-
ers. Many workers in the 1960s lacked basic reading and 
mathematical skills, and education levels were low 
enough to make retraining problematic: half of U.S. fac-
tory production workers had no more than a tenth- grade 
education.45
Individual unions and employers tried to grapple with 
automation in their own ways. New York electricians 
bargained for a five- hour day in 1963 to spread the avail-
able work. The United Auto Workers proposed a flexible 
workweek, rising to forty- eight hours when the unem -
ployment rate fell below a specified level and falling 
below forty hours, to save jobs, when unemployment 
was high; the automakers rejected that plan, but they 
eventually accepted the union’s proposal for a fund to 
continue workers’ incomes in the event of layoffs. The 
Airline Navigators’ Association agreed to surrender jobs 
at Trans World Airlines in return for up- front cash pay-
ments, plus three years of severance pay and health in-
surance. The United Mine Workers, the International 
Typographical Union, the International Ladies’ Garment 
Workers Union, and the American Federation of Musi-
cians all tried to bargain for contracts that protected 
their members as employers sought to automate.46
The longshore agreements were seen as models for 
addressing these concerns. They by no means resolved all 
problems. “The union gave up more than it should have,” 
former ILWU secretary- treasurer Louis Goldblatt in -
168 • Chapter 6
sisted in 1978. “It did not get all it was fundamentally 
entitled to, such as recapturing all work on the water -
front.” There were many struggles yet to come over union 
control as container terminals moved away from the 
docks. On both coasts, the Teamsters union challenged 
labor contracts that promised off- dock stuffing and un-
stuffing work to the longshore unions, disputes that the 
courts eventually settled in the Teamsters’ favor. The use 
of ships that carried entire barges loaded with containers 
posed a novel set of labor- relations challenges, and union 
representation of the office workers whose computers 
increasingly controlled container operations would be a 
source of dispute for decades.
47
More problematic for many longshoremen were the 
social changes stemming from the disappearance of the 
timeworn pattern of waterfront work. Traditional skills, 
such as knowing how to stow cargo aboard a breakbulk 
ship, lost value. Older men, whose seniority had enabled 
them to climb from the depths of the hold to less de -
manding work on the deck, found that smaller gang sizes 
made deckmen’s jobs too stressful. Fathers could no lon-
ger bring their sons into high- paying, albeit dangerous 
and demanding, waterfront jobs, because the jobs them-
selves were vanishing. Longshore families, now receiving 
stable incomes, were free to move from tough waterfront 
neighborhoods to comfortable suburbs, dealing a blow 
to the class solidarity that came from isolation. The days 
of long- established gangs working together, of casual 
conditions that let men work when they wanted to work 
and fish when they wanted to fish, would never be re -
gained, as work once marked by independence and free-
dom from control became a high- paying but highly 
Union Disunion • 169
structured job. “They’re turning this job into a factory 
job,” complained New York longshoreman Peter Bell. 
Agreed Sidney Roger, editor of the ILWU newspaper in 
San Francisco, “I’ve heard so many men say, this is ex-
actly what they said: ‘It’s no fun any longer working on 
the waterfront. The fun is gone.’ The fun has to do with 
the men working together, a sense of camaraderie.”
48
Despite these discontents, the longshore unions’ tena-
cious resistance to automation appeared to establish the 
principle that long- term workers deserved to be treated 
humanely as businesses embraced innovations that 
would eliminate their jobs. That principle was ultimately 
accepted in very few parts of the American economy and 
was never codified in law. Years of bargaining by two 
very different union leaders made the longshore industry 
a rare exception, in which employers that profited from 
automation were forced to share the benefits with the 
individuals whose work was automated away.49
CHAPTER 7
Setting the Standard
Containers were the talk of the transportation world 
by the late 1950s. Truckers were hauling them, railroads 
were carrying them, Pan- Atlantic’s Sea- Land Service was 
putting them on ships, the U.S. Army was moving them 
to Europe. But “container” meant very different things 
to different people. In Europe, it was usually a wooden 
crate with steel reinforcements, 4 or 5 feet tall. For the 
Army, it involved mainly “Conex boxes,” steel boxes 8½ 
feet deep and 6 feet 10½ inches high used for military 
families’ household goods. Some containers were de -
signed to be shifted by cranes with hooks, and others had 
slots beneath the floor so they could be moved by fork-
lifts. The Marine Steel Corporation, a New York manu-
facturer, advertised no fewer than 30 different models, 
from a 15- foot- long steel box with doors on the side to 
a steel- frame container with plywood sides, 4½ feet 
wide, made to ship “five- and- dime” merchandise to Cen-
tral America. Of the 58,000 privately owned shipping 
containers in the United States, according to a 1959 sur-
vey, 43,000 were 8 feet square or less at the base, while 
a mere 15,000, mainly those owned by Sea- Land and 
Matson, were more than 8 feet long.1
Setting the Standard • 171
This diversity threatened to nip containerization in the 
bud. If one transportation company’s containers would 
not fit on another’s ships or railcars, each company 
would need a large fleet of containers exclusively for its 
own customers. An exporter would have to be cautious 
about putting its goods into a container, because the 
loaded box could go only on a single carrier’s vessel, even 
if another line’s ship was sailing sooner. A European rail-
road container could not cross the Atlantic, because U.S. 
trucks and railroads were not set up to handle European 
sizes, while the incompatible systems used by various 
American railroads meant that a container on the New 
York Central could not readily be transferred to the Mis-
souri Pacific. As containers became more common, each 
ship line would need its own dock and cranes in every 
port, no matter how small its business or infrequent its 
ships’ visits, because other companies’ equipment would 
not be able to handle its boxes. So long as containers 
came in dozens of shapes and sizes, they would do little 
to reduce the total cost of moving freight.
The United States Maritime Administration decided in 
1958 to put an end to this incipient anarchy. Marad, as 
it was known, was an obscure government agency, but it 
held vast power over the maritime industry. Marad and 
a sister agency, the Federal Maritime Board, dispensed 
subsidies to build ships, administered laws dictating that 
government freight should travel in U.S.- flag vessels, 
gave operating subsidies to U.S. ships on international 
routes, and enforced the Jones Act, the venerable law 
dictating that only American- built ships, using American 
crews and owned by American companies, could carry 
cargo between U.S. ports. The wide variety among con-
172 • Chapter 7
tainers increased the government’s financial risk: if a ship 
line took Marad’s money, built a vessel to carry its own 
unique containers, and then ran into financial problems, 
Marad could end up foreclosing on a ship that no one 
would want to buy. Marad’s desire to set common stan-
dards was supported by the Navy, which had the right to 
commandeer subsidized ships in the event of war and 
worried that a merchant fleet using incompatible con -
tainer systems would complicate logistics. The situation 
was urgent: several ship lines were seeking subsidies to 
build vessels to carry containers, and if standards were 
not set quickly, each carrier might go off in its own direc-
tion. In June 1958, Marad named two committees of 
experts, one to recommend standards for container sizes 
and the other to study container construction.
The problems the committees faced were not entirely 
novel. The railway industry, for example, had gone 
through a standardization process. The gauge—the dis-
tance between the inside faces of a pair of rails—on 
North American railroads varied between 3 feet and 6 
feet during the nineteenth century. Trains on Britain’s 
Great Western Railway, with a gauge of 7 feet, could not 
travel on lines with the most common British gauge of 4 
feet 8.5 inches. In Spain, gauges varied from 3 feet 3.3 
inches to 5 feet 6 inches, and the multiplicity of gauges 
in Australia foreclosed long- distance rail transport well 
into the twentieth century. In some cases, the gauge had 
been chosen more or less randomly. In others, builders 
deliberately sought to prevent their line from intercon -
necting with others that might compete for traffic. Over 
time, these differences worked themselves out. The Penn-
sylvania Railroad took over lines in Ohio and New Jer-
Setting the Standard • 173
sey after the Civil War and converted them to its own 
gauge. When Prussia proposed a railway link to the 
Netherlands in the 1850s, the Dutch narrowed their lines 
so that trains could run through from Amsterdam to 
Berlin.2
The railway precedent suggested that ship lines might 
eventually make their container systems compatible 
without a government dictate. Yet the analogy is mis -
leading. The gauge that became “standard” on railways 
had no particular technical superiority, and standardiza-
tion had almost no economic implications; the width of 
the track did not determine the design of freight cars, nor 
the capacity of a car, nor the time required to assemble a 
train. In the shipping world, on the other hand, individ-
ual companies had strong reasons to prefer one container 
system to another. The first carrier with fully container-
ized ships, Pan- Atlantic, used containers that were 35 
feet long, because that was the maximum allowed on the 
highways leading to its home base in New Jersey. A 35- 
foot container would have been inefficient for carrying 
canned pineapple, Matson Navigation’s biggest single 
cargo, because a fully loaded container would have been 
too heavy for a crane to lift; Matson’s careful studies 
showed that a 24- foot box was best for its particular mix 
of traffic. Grace Line, which was planning service to Ven-
ezuela, worried about South America’s mountain roads 
and opted for shorter, 17- foot containers. Grace’s design 
included small slots at the bottom for forklifts, but Pan- 
Atlantic and Matson chose not to pay extra for slots 
because they did not use forklifts. Each company deemed 
the fittings it used to lift its containers the best for load-
ing and discharging ships at top speed. Conforming to 
174 • Chapter 7
industry standards, each line felt, would mean using a 
system that was less than ideal for its own needs.3
There were two other important distinctions between 
standardizing rail gauges and standardizing containers. 
One was scope: the width of a railroad track affected 
only railroads, whereas the design of containers affected 
not just ship lines, but also railroads, truck lines, and 
even shippers who owned their own equipment. The 
other difference was timing. Railroads had been around 
for several decades before incompatible track gauges 
came to be seen as a major problem. Container shipping 
was brand- new, and pushing standardization before the 
industry developed might lock everyone into designs that 
would later prove undesirable. From an economic per -
spective, then, there was every reason to doubt the desir-
ability of the standardization process that began in 1958. 
If government agencies in those days had made it a rou-
tine practice to conduct cost- benefit studies, most likely 
the entire process of container standardization would 
never have begun.4
These concerns were unrepresented when Marad’s two 
expert committees held their first meetings on succes -
sive days in November 1958. Neither Pan- Atlantic nor 
Matson was seeking government construction subsi -
dies, so the only two companies actually operating con-
tainerships in 1958 were not invited to join in the pro-
cess of setting standards for the industry that they were 
creating.
Controversy arose almost immediately. After much 
debate, the dimension committee agreed to define a 
“family” of acceptable container sizes, not just a single 
Setting the Standard • 175
size. It voted unanimously that 8 feet should be the stan-
dard width, despite the fact that some European rail -
roads could not carry loads wider than 7 feet; the com-
mittee would “have to be guided mainly by domestic 
requirements, with the hope that foreign practice would 
gradually conform to our standards.” Then the commit-
tee took up container heights. Some maritime industry 
representatives favored containers 8 feet tall. Trucking 
industry officials, who were observers without a vote, 
argued that 8½- foot- tall boxes would let customers 
squeeze more cargo into each container and allow room 
for forklifts to work inside. The committee finally agreed 
that containers should be no more than 8½ feet high but 
could be less. Length was a tougher issue still. The diver-
sity of containers in use or on order presented a serious 
operational problem: while a short container could be 
stacked atop a longer one, its weight would not rest upon 
the longer one’s load- bearing steel corner posts. To sup-
port a shorter container above, the bottom container 
would require either steel posts along its sides or thick, 
load- bearing walls. More posts or thicker walls, though, 
would increase weight and reduce interior space, making 
the container more costly to use. The length question 
was deferred.5
The other Marad committee, on container construc -
tion, defined its most important task as establishing 
maximum weights for loaded containers. Weight limits 
were crucial, because they would determine the lifting 
power required of cranes and the load that the bottom 
container in a stack might have to bear. The weight of 
empty containers, however, would not affect cranes, 
ships, or trucks, and the committee decided not to ad -
176 • Chapter 7
dress it. Various other complicated issues, such as the 
strength of corner posts, the design of doors, and the 
standardization of corner fittings for lifting by cranes, 
were put off.6
The two committees appointed by Marad did not 
have the field to themselves. There was a competitor: the 
venerable American Standards Association (ASA). The 
association, supported by private industry, was in the 
business of setting standards, dealing with subjects as 
diverse as the size of screw threads and the construction 
of plaster walls. The work was vital but also mind- 
numbing; the engineers on a typical American Standards 
Association committee would study technical reports, 
hear the views and interests of the firms concerned, and 
eventually recommend standards that individual compa-
nies could abide by if they wished. To deal with contain-
ers, the association created Materials Handling Sectional 
Committee 5—MH- 5, to all concerned—in July 1958. 
MH- 5, in turn, organized itself into subcommittees, 
which were instructed to develop specifications that 
would “permit optimum interchange among carriers and 
also be compatible with domestic pallet containers and 
cargo containers, and foreign carriers.”
7
The MH- 5 committee’s first act was to ask the Marad 
committees to withdraw from the scene. The maritime 
industry alone should not be making decisions about 
standardization, MH- 5 officials argued; the process 
should involve other affected industries, and should in-
clude foreign organizations so that the standards might 
eventually apply globally. The Marad committees re -
fused to wait for a decade- long international process. 
They carried on over the winter of 1959, debating maxi-
Setting the Standard • 177
mum weights, lifting methods, and the pros and cons of 
requiring steel posts every eight feet along container 
walls rather than just at the corners. The MH- 5 subcom-
mittees, involving many of the same participants, went 
to work on the same issues. The MH- 5 subcommittee on 
dimensions quickly reached a consensus that all pairs of 
lengths in use or about to be used—12 and 24 feet, 17 
and 35 feet, 20 and 40 feet—would be considered “stan-
dard.” The subcommittee rejected only a proposal to en-
dorse 10- foot containers, because members thought 
them too small to be efficient, and, in any case, none 
were planned.8
The MH- 5 process was dominated by trailer manufac-
turers, truck lines, and railroads. These interests wanted 
to reach a decision on container sizes quickly, because 
once standard dimensions were approved, the domestic 
use of containers was expected to burgeon. The specifics 
mattered less: within the limits set by state laws, trucks 
and railroads could accommodate almost any length and 
weight. The maritime interests that were influential in 
the Marad committees, in contrast, cared greatly about 
the specifics. A ship built with cells for 27- foot contain-
ers could not easily be redesigned to carry 35- foot con-
tainers. Most ships then carrying containers had ship-
board cranes built to handle a particular size, and they 
would have to be converted to handle other sizes. Large 
containers might prove impossible to fill with the avail-
able freight, but smaller ones would increase costs by 
requiring more lifts at the dock. Some lines had made 
large investments that could be rendered worthless if 
their containers were deemed “nonstandard.” Maritime 
executives were especially concerned that Marad would 
178 • Chapter 7
deny financial help and perhaps even government car -
goes to “nonstandard” operators. Bull Line, which car -
ried containers 15 feet long and 6 feet 10 inches high on 
its breakbulk ships to Puerto Rico, begged to be left 
alone, because it had no desire to interchange containers 
with other companies. Other lines urged the government 
to let the market sort things out as the container industry 
matured. When the Marad committee on dimensions re-
viewed the MH- 5 subcommittee’s six proposed “stan-
dard” lengths in April 1959, it split. The deciding vote in 
favor of the MH- 5 standards came from Marad itself, 
which was in a hurry to get standards, any standards, 
into place.9
The Marad committee also changed its mind about 
height. The previous November it had voted to make 8½ 
feet the maximum height for containers, but it ruled now 
for 8 feet. The change stemmed from concern that an 
8½- foot- high container would violate highway height 
limits in some eastern states—a problem that was real 
for trucks hauling containers on standard trailers, but 
one that did not affect trucks pulling the specially de -
signed chassis used by Pan- Atlantic and Matson. A lower 
height limit would benefit eastern truckers at the expense 
of ship lines: an 8- foot- high container held 6 percent less 
cargo than an 8½- foot- high container of the same length, 
and would be less attractive to shippers. On height stan-
dards as on length standards, the committee split, with 
the government once again casting a vote that would 
determine how private transportation companies would 
invest. The new standards were promptly tested by Dan-
iel K. Ludwig’s American- Hawaiian Steamship Com-
pany, which wanted to build a ship carrying 30- foot- long 
Setting the Standard • 179
containers. The Federal Maritime Board would not ap-
prove federal mortgage insurance for a ship fitted for 
nonstandard containers, so American- Hawaiian asked 
the committee to declare 30- foot containers “standard.” 
The committee rejected the request 3 to 2, with Marad 
once more casting the deciding vote. Federal aid was not 
forthcoming, and the ship was never built.
10
The sister Marad committee, dealing with container 
construction and fittings, worked more smoothly. Mem-
bers readily agreed that each container should be able to 
carry the weight of five fully loaded containers atop it, 
with the weight to be carried on the corner posts rather 
than on container walls. All containers should be de -
signed to be lifted by spreader bars or hooks engaging 
the top corners. Rings on top for lifting by hooks or slots 
underneath for forklifts would be acceptable, but not 
mandatory. Those decisions gave engineers the basic cri-
teria to use in designing new containers. The committee 
also recommended that each ship be designed with vari-
ous sizes of steel cells so that it could carry multiple sizes 
of containers. With that, the two Marad committees 
scheduled no further meetings.11
Meanwhile, yet another player entered the standards 
business. The National Defense Transportation Associa-
tion, representing companies that handled military cargo, 
decided that it, too, would study container dimensions. 
The effort’s chief proponent was a brash entrepreneur 
named Morris Forgash, who had built the United States 
Freight Company into a $175- million- a- year business 
over two decades by picking up small lots of cargo from 
various shippers, consolidating them into truck trailers 
or containers, and shipping the trailers cross- country by 
180 • Chapter 7
rail. The outspoken Forgash impelled his committee to 
reach consensus quickly. By late summer of 1959, it had 
agreed unanimously that “standard” containers would 
be 20 feet or 40 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 8 feet high. 
The other lengths approved by the MH- 5 and Marad 
committees, and the 8 ½ - foot- high boxes supported by 
some truckers and most ship lines, would not be accept-
able for military freight—a decision Forgash’s committee 
was able to reach only because no one from the maritime 
industry was involved. No matter: individual companies’ 
preferences, Forgash asserted, would have to yield to the 
need for uniformity. “Even if we reach the goal slowly, 
we must have a goal,” he said. “Otherwise, obsolescence 
will overtake us all if each man is his own engineer.”
12
With the MH- 5 subcommittee and the Marad dimen-
sions committee having adopted one set of “standard” 
sizes, and with the National Defense Transportation As-
sociation having approved another, the wheeling and 
dealing began at the American Standards Association. 
Under the ASA’s normal procedures, the February 1959 
subcommittee recommendation to designate six “stan -
dard” sizes would have been sent for a mail ballot 
among all participating organizations. The vote never 
occurred. Instead, insiders set to work to change the 
recommendations.
A task force of the dimensions subcommittee con -
vened on September 16, 1959, and its chairman, E. B. 
Ogden, announced that it was desirable to revisit the 
question of container length. All but two eastern states 
now permitted 40- foot trailers, Ogden said, so the length 
limit that had justified 35- foot boxes no longer existed. 
In the West, eight states had increased their length limits 
Setting the Standard • 181
to permit trucks to pull two trailers of 27 feet each, 
rather than 24 feet apiece. Ogden, whose Consolidated 
Freightways was the country’s largest truck line, urged 
the committee to approve 27- foot containers as a re -
gional standard size for the West, to reduce costs for 
trucking companies.
Then Herbert Hall, the chair of the entire MH- 5 pro-
cess, intervened. Hall was a retired engineer at Alumi -
num Company of America, which made aluminum sheets 
used to manufacture containers. He had sparked the en-
tire standardization process with a presentation to an 
engineering society in 1957. Hall knew little about the 
economics of using containers, but he was fascinated by 
the concept of an arithmetic relationship—preferred 
numbers, he called it—among sizes. He believed that 
making containers in 10- , 20- , 30- , and 40- foot lengths 
would create flexibility. A shipper could put freight for a 
single customer in the most suitable size rather than 
wasting space inside a full 40- foot container. A truck 
equipped to handle a 40- foot container could equally 
well pick up two 20- foot containers (their precise length 
was 19 feet 10.5 inches, to make it easy to fit two to -
gether in a 40- foot space), or one 20- foot container and 
two 10- footers. Trains and ships would be able to handle 
combinations of smaller boxes in the same way. Hall’s 
enthusiasm was not shared by railroads and ship lines, 
because loading a train or ship with four 10- foot con -
tainers would cost four times as much as loading a single 
40- footer. Hall reminded the task force that a higher 
body, the ASA’s Standards Review Board, would have to 
approve any proposed standards, and he opined that it 
would not accept the 12- foot, 17- foot, 24- foot, and 35- 
182 • Chapter 7
foot containers that the MH- 5 subcommittee had en -
dorsed. The 10- , 20- , and 40- foot lengths Hall favored 
were promptly approved, while the other lengths were 
deleted from the list of “standard” sizes. Those recom -
mendations, along with the proposed 27- foot standard 
for the West and several standards for container con -
struction, were sent to member organizations for a vote 
late in 1959.13
The standards Hall wanted stood to have huge impli-
cations for the transport sector. No ships or containers 
then in use or in design would fit into the container sys-
tem of the future. Pan- Atlantic and Matson would face 
an unwelcome choice. If they agreed to use only 10- foot, 
20- foot, and 40- foot containers, they would be forced to 
write off tens of millions of dollars of investment, much 
of it undertaken within the previous two years, and to 
shift to container sizes that they deemed inefficient for 
their own purposes. If Pan- Atlantic and Matson declined 
to adopt the standards, they would forfeit eligibility for 
government ship- construction subsidies, while their 
competitors would be able to build “standard” contain-
erships partially at government expense. Either way, the 
latecomers to containerization would gain at the expense 
of the pioneers. Individual companies did not vote in the 
MH- 5 committee, but companies’ interests were so dis-
parate that more than a dozen of the industry organiza-
tions that did have voting rights failed to reach internal 
consensus. The proposed 27- foot regional standard was 
defeated, but the recommendation for Hall’s “modular” 
lengths met with large numbers of abstentions.
14
Matters were so confused that Hall decided to orga-
nize a revote. This time, the questions about container 
Setting the Standard • 183
construction were left off the ballot, which now had only 
a single question: should the association establish stan-
dard nominal dimensions 8 feet wide, 8 feet high, and 10, 
20, 30, and 40 feet long? The 30- foot container had not 
been debated in the various task forces and subcommit-
tees, but Hall added it in order to have “a definite rela-
tionship between the capacities of adjacent sizes”; the 
fact that it appealed to Europeans worried about moving 
big containers through narrow city streets was an added 
attraction. Many steamship organizations abstained once 
again because of internal divisions, and again Marad 
backed the proposal. No vote count was released, but 
Hall, as chairman, decided that the 10- foot multiples had 
won sufficient support. On April 14, 1961, 10- , 20- , 30- , 
and 40- foot boxes were declared to be the only standard 
containers. The Federal Maritime Board promptly an -
nounced that only containerships designed for those 
sizes could receive construction subsidies.15
The standards wars were by no means over. In fact, they 
had barely begun. At American urging, the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO), which then had 
thirty- seven nations as members, agreed to study con -
tainers. At the time, only very small containers were 
being shipped across borders, but bigger ones obviously 
were on the way. The ISO project was meant to establish 
worldwide guidelines before firms made large financial 
commitments. Delegates from eleven countries, and ob-
servers from fifteen more, came to New York in Septem-
ber 1961 to start the process. Most were appointed by 
their governments, with the United States, represented by 
the American Standards Association, being an exception. 
184 • Chapter 7
The United States, as the convener of the meeting, held 
the chair.16
ISO’s practice, wherever possible, was to decide how 
a product must perform rather than how it should be 
made. This meant that ISO Technical Committee 104 
(TC104) would focus on making containers easily inter-
changeable, not on the details of construction. TC104 
was thus able to avoid prolonged debate between propo-
nents of steel containers, popular in Europe, and advo-
cates of the aluminum containers more common in 
America. No standard would dictate aluminum or steel. 
TC104 established three working groups and began 
what would inevitably be a slow- moving process, with 
many interests involved. The American Standards Asso-
ciation’s MH- 5 subcommittees continued work on other 
domestic standards, with the hope that whatever they 
agreed would later be accepted by ISO. Many leading 
U.S. transport engineers were involved simultaneously in 
both groups.
17
The wrangling over container sizes, which had con -
sumed three years in the United States, was now repeated 
at the international level. By 1962, much of Europe was 
allowing larger vehicles than was America, so the new 
American standard sizes, 8 feet high, 8 feet wide, and 10, 
20, 30, or 40 feet long, faced no technical obstacles. Eco-
nomic interests were another story. Many continental 
European railroads owned fleets of much smaller con -
tainers, made for 8 or 10 cubic meters of freight rather 
than the 72.5- cubic- meter volume of a 40- foot container. 
The Europeans wanted their containers recognized as 
standard. The British, Japanese, and North American 
delegations were all opposed, because the European con-
Setting the Standard • 185
tainers were slightly wider than 8 feet. A compromise 
was struck in April 1963. Smaller containers, including 
the European railroad sizes and American 5- foot and 
6⅔ - foot boxes, would be recognized as “Series 2” con-
tainers. In 1964, these smaller sizes, along with 10- , 20- , 
30- , and 40- foot containers, were formally adopted as 
ISO standards. Not a single container owned by the two 
leading containership operators, Sea- Land Service (the 
former Pan- Atlantic) and Matson, conformed to the new 
“standard” dimensions.18
While one set of ISO subcommittees and task forces was 
hashing out dimensions, other groups of experts were 
seeking common ground concerning strength require -
ments and lifting standards. In both North America and 
Europe, small containers were often moved with fork -
lifts, and some had eyes on the top through which long-
shoremen or railroad workers could insert hooks con -
nected to winches. The larger containers introduced in 
North America had steel fittings at each corner, which 
were welded to the corner post, to a top or bottom rail 
running the length of the container, and to cross- members 
running across the front or back end. The corner fittings 
were cast with holes, through which the containers could 
be lifted, locked to a chassis, or connected to one an -
other. These castings were simple to make, costing about 
five dollars apiece in 1961.
19
The problem came with the lifting and locking devices 
that fit into the holes. Pan- Atlantic, the first out of the 
gate, had applied for a patent on its particular system, 
which used conical lugs that could slip through the ob-
long holes of its corner fittings and automatically lock 
186 • Chapter 7
into place; a double- headed device to hold two contain-
ers together could be secured with the twist of a handle. 
Pan- Atlantic threatened to bring suit against anyone in-
fringing on its design, forcing other ship lines and trailer 
manufacturers to develop their own locks and corner 
fittings. This meant that, even if container sizes were 
standardized, Sea- Land’s cranes would not be able to lift 
Grace’s containers, and Sea- Land containers could never 
ride on Matson chassis. Railroads that carried the con-
tainers of various ship lines needed complicated systems 
of chains and locks to secure all of the different contain-
ers, because one simple locking system would not work 
for all. Agreeing on a standard corner fitting thus was 
crucial to making containers readily interchangeable. 
The obstacle was that every company had financial rea-
sons to favor its own fitting. Adopting some other design 
would require it to install new fittings on every container, 
to buy new lifting and locking devices, and to pay a li-
cense fee to the patent holder.
An MH- 5 task force had tried, and failed, to come up 
with a new design compatible with all existing corner 
fittings in 1961. Inevitably, the question arose: could any 
of the patented corner fittings serve as the U.S. standard? 
It could, Hall advised at an MH- 5 meeting in December 
1961, so long as it was in widespread use and was avail-
able to all for a nominal royalty. The task force chair -
man, Keith Tantlinger, had designed the Sea- Land fitting 
while working for Malcom McLean in 1955. He was 
now chief engineer at Fruehauf Trailer Company, and he 
offered royalty- free use of Fruehauf’s newest design, in 
which a steel lug slipped through the hole in a corner 
fitting and locked into place with a pin. Strick Trailers, a 
Setting the Standard • 187
Fruehauf competitor, objected that the Fruehauf design 
was not good for coupling containers together, and, be-
sides, it had not been proven in actual use. Strick’s own 
design, however, was mired in a patent dispute and could 
not be offered as a standard. National Castings Com -
pany threatened a lawsuit unless any new standard was 
compatible with its own system, which used lugs de -
signed to spread apart when they passed through the 
hole in the corner fitting.
The technical differences between these systems were 
important, especially for ship lines. Containerships were 
hugely capital- intensive, and the industry’s viability de-
pended on minimizing port time and maximizing the 
time that each vessel was under way, earning revenue. 
The ship lines thus had special concern about “gather -
ing,” the tendency of the lugs of the lifting device to posi-
tion themselves in the holes in the corner fittings. If a 
fitting was poor at gathering when a crane lowered its 
spreader to pick up a container, the crane operator often 
had to raise the spreader and lower it a second time. 
Matson chief engineer Les Harlander calculated that if 
gathering difficulties added just one second to the aver -
age time required to lift a container, his company would 
lose four thousand dollars per ship per year. After a full 
day of debate, the subcommittee voted on the Fruehauf 
design and split badly. There was no ringing endorse -
ment of a national standard.20
More meetings through 1962 failed to break the dead-
lock. Finally, Fred Muller, an engineer serving as the 
MH- 5 committee’s secretary, offered a thought: since the 
Sea- Land corner fitting was working smoothly with the 
world’s largest fleet of containers, perhaps the company 
188 • Chapter 7
would be willing to release its patent rights. Tantlinger 
made an appointment with Malcom McLean. McLean 
had no reason to be fond of the American Standards As-
sociation, which only recently had excluded Sea- Land’s 
35- foot containers from its list of standard sizes. None-
theless, he understood that common technology would 
stimulate the growth of containerization. On January 29, 
1963, Sea- Land released its patents, so that the MH- 5 
committee could use them as the basis for a standard 
corner fitting and twist lock.21
Agreement on a single design proved elusive. Various 
trailer manufacturers were still pushing their own prod-
ucts. Numerous ship lines and railroads had started to 
buy containers, albeit in small numbers, and they em -
ployed a wide variety of lifting systems. Lack of consen-
sus meant that the U.S. delegates did not have an official 
design to offer when the ISO container committee met in 
Germany in October 1964. The Americans promoted the 
Sea- Land fitting as the basis for a potential international 
standard, with Tantlinger distributing half- size ceramic 
models to show other delegates what it looked like, but 
no design was put to a vote.
22
Back home, the engineers’ debate over the stresses and 
tolerances of corner fittings flared into a bitter commer-
cial dispute. The National Castings corner fitting, an 
elongated box with two rectangular holes in the long 
side and a large square opening on the top, had been 
adopted by more container owners than had any other. 
One big company, Grace Line, had modern container 
cranes that operated on the National Castings system. 
Smaller lines that carried containers along with mixed 
freight in their breakbulk ships liked the National Cast-
Setting the Standard • 189
Figure 2. The Sea- Land twist lock.
190 • Chapter 7
ings fitting because the large openings let them use old- 
fashioned hooks for lifting and lowering. Changing to a 
different system would be expensive; Grace Line esti -
mated the cost of replacing the corner fittings on its con-
tainers and the lifting frames on its cranes to be $750,000. 
National Castings sought wider support by agreeing to 
royalty- free use of its designs, although only for contain-
ers to be carried on American ships. The company per -
suaded the Maritime Administration that it should sup-
port the National Castings fitting as the international 
standard rather than a fitting based on the Sea- Land 
design.23
Four of the leading steamship lines, Sea- Land, Mat-
son, Alaska Steamship, and American President Lines, 
fought back, because adoption of the National Castings 
fitting would have required them to change all of their 
containers. Instead, they proposed a minor change to the 
fitting that the MH- 5 committee was designing based on 
the Sea- Land patent. If the hole on the top of the fitting 
were moved by half an inch, they estimated, 10,000 con-
tainers—about 80 percent of all large containers used by 
U.S. railroads and ship lines other than Sea- Land—
would be “reasonably compatible” with Sea- Land’s. The 
fitting they recommended, they said, would cost less than 
half as much as the National Castings fitting ($42.24 
versus $97.90) and weigh barely half as much (124 
pounds versus 236). As the battle grew intense, the poli-
tics of standardization suddenly changed. National Cast-
ings Company was sold and abandoned efforts to pro-
mote its corner fitting. Marad, which had favored 
National Castings, reversed course and urged ship lines 
to accept whatever MH- 5 agreed on. Finally, an unusual 
Setting the Standard • 191
decision came from the top. The American Standards 
Association’s Standards Review Board ignored the fact 
that the specialists on its MH- 5 committee were still de-
bating the finer details of corner fittings. On September 
16, 1965, it approved a modified version of the Sea- Land 
fitting as the U.S. standard, just in time for the next meet-
ing of the ISO container committee in The Hague.
24
The sixty- one ISO delegates were offered two compet-
ing designs when they convened in the Dutch seat of 
government on September 19. The United States pre -
sented the modified Sea- Land corner fitting as the new 
U.S. standard, and the National Castings fitting was put 
forth as the British standard. The British quickly agreed 
that the American favorite was superior. Only one road-
block remained. ISO rules required that the documents 
supporting proposed standards had to be distributed 
four months in advance of a meeting. The MH- 5 com-
mittee had made its recommendation only a few days 
earlier, and no technical documents were ready. The ISO 
committee voted unanimously to waive the four- month 
rule. Three high- ranking corporate executives—Tant -
linger, Harlander, and Eugene Hinden of Strick Trail -
ers—then retreated to a railcar factory in nearby Utrecht, 
where they worked with Dutch draftsmen for forty- eight 
hours nonstop to produce the requisite drawings. On 
September 24, 1965, the ISO delegates approved the 
American design as the international standard for corner 
fittings.
25
The new era of freight transportation finally seemed 
to have arrived. In principle, land and sea carriers would 
soon be able to handle one another’s containers. Con -
tainer leasing companies could expand their fleets in the 
192 • Chapter 7
knowledge that many carriers would be prepared to lease 
their equipment, and shippers could make use of con -
tainers without wedding themselves to a single ship line. 
“Projects awaiting the outcome of the fitting question are 
already underway,” a trade publication trumpeted within 
a few months of the vote in The Hague. “Container- 
handling hardware can now be designed with more cer-
tainty, and an increasing number of products designed to 
load and carry containers will be marketed.”26
The cart, however, had gotten ahead of the horse: the 
ISO container committee had agreed on what the corner 
fitting should look like without defining all of the loads 
and stresses it should be able to withstand. Starting in the 
autumn of 1965, dozens of ship lines and leasing compa-
nies began ordering containers with fittings based on the 
design that had worked for Sea- Land’s operations but 
had never been tested under other conditions. The ISO 
committee had yet to set maximum container weights, 
for example. No one could say how thick the steel in the 
fitting should be, because it was not clear how much 
weight it might have to hold. Sea- Land’s cranes lifted by 
connecting to the tops of the fittings in the top corners 
of a container; it was uncertain how the fittings would 
perform if a container were lifted from the fittings in the 
bottom corners. Railroads in Europe had different cou-
pling systems from those in the United States, meaning 
that the cars in a train banged against one another with 
greater force, and the Sea- Land fittings and locks had 
never been subjected to such conditions. And what if five 
or six containers were stacked on the deck of a ship? In 
high seas, the stack of containers might tilt as much as 
30 or 40 degrees away from vertical. Would the newly 
Setting the Standard • 193
approved corner fittings and the twist locks connecting 
the containers survive such stresses?
Through 1966, engineers around the world tested the 
new fittings and found a variety of shortcomings. As an 
extra check, a container was put through emergency 
tests in Detroit, just ahead of another meeting of the ISO 
committee. It failed, the fittings on the bottom of the test 
container giving way under heavy loads. When TC104 
convened in London in January 1967, it was faced with 
the uncomfortable fact that the corner fittings it had ap-
proved in 1965 were deficient. Nine engineers were 
named to an ad hoc panel and told to solve the problems 
quickly. They agreed on the tests that fittings would have 
to pass, and then two engineers, one British, one Ameri-
can, were sent to a hotel room with their slide rules and 
told to redesign the fitting so that it could pass the tests. 
Requiring thicker steel in the walls of each fitting, they 
calculated, would solve most of the problems. No exist-
ing container complied with their “ad hoc” design. Over 
the bitter complaints of many ship lines that had encoun-
tered no problems with their own containers, ISO ap -
proved the “ad hoc” design at a meeting in Moscow in 
June 1967. The thousands of boxes that had been built 
since ISO first approved corner fittings in 1965 had to 
have new fittings welded into place, at a cost that reached 
into the millions of dollars.27
The process of standardization was proceeding nicely. 
The economic benefit of standardization, however, was 
still not clear. Containers of 10, 20, 30, and 40 feet had 
become American and international standards, but the 
neat arithmetic relationship among the “standard” sizes 
194 • Chapter 7
did not translate into demand from shippers or ship 
lines. Not a single ship line was using 30- foot containers. 
Only a handful of 10- foot containers had been pur -
chased, and the main carrier using them soon concluded 
that it would not buy more. As for 20- foot containers, 
land carriers hated them. Ship lines “have designed, es-
pecially in their 20- foot equipment, a highly efficient 
port to port container without due consideration of how 
the box would move efficiently from port to customers,” 
an executive of the New York Central Railroad com -
plained. So far as truck lines were concerned, the bigger 
the container, the more freight could be transported per 
hour of driver labor. Trucking companies’ preference 
was revealed by the truck trailers they chose to buy, al-
most none of which had 20- foot bodies. Hall’s notion of 
coupling two 20- foot containers together on a single 
trailer proved to be impractical, because if each con -
tainer was filled to its weight limit, the combined weight 
would violate highway regulations in every state. Towing 
two 20- foot containers in tandem was impractical as 
well, because the same truck could move more weight by 
pulling two 24- footers or, in many states, two 27- footers.28
The most powerful evidence against the international 
standards came from the marketplace. Despite the U.S. 
government’s pressure on carriers to use “standard” 
sizes, nonstandard containers continued to dominate. 
Sea- Land’s 35- foot containers and Matson’s 24- footers, 
all a nonstandard 8 feet 6 inches high, accounted for 
two- thirds of all containers owned by U.S. ship lines in 
1965. Only 16 percent of the containers in service com-
plied with the standards for length, and a good number 
of those were not of standard 8- foot height. Standard 
Setting the Standard • 195
containers clearly were not taking the industry by storm. 
The large ones were too hard to fill—too few companies 
shipped enough freight between two locations to require 
an entire 40- foot container—and small ones required 
too much handling. As Matson executive vice president 
Norman Scott explained, “In the economics of transpor-
tation, there is no magic in mathematical symmetry.”
29
Their business success notwithstanding, Sea- Land and 
Matson had reason to worry about the drive for standard- 
size containers. Both companies had raised tens of mil-
lions of dollars of private capital to buy equipment and 
convert their ships to carry containers, and so far neither 
had sought federal construction subsidies. That situation 
was now changing. By 1965, both Sea- Land and Matson 
were preparing to expand internationally, and they might 
want subsidies to build new ships. In addition, Marad 
dispensed other types of aid. It gave operating subsidies 
to U.S. ship lines sailing international routes, to compen-
sate for the requirement that they employ only high- 
wage American seamen, and it enforced regulations giv-
ing U.S.- flag vessels “preference” to carry government 
cargo overseas. If Marad were to limit those subsidies 
only to companies adhering to the “voluntary” MH- 5 
standards, Sea- Land and Matson would be at a serious 
competitive disadvantage. Executives from the two com-
panies met in Washington and decided to join forces to 
fight the U.S. government.
30
They started back at the American Standards Associa-
tion. The association’s MH- 5 committee had been quies-
cent, but in the fall of 1965, with the ISO beginning to 
adopt international standards for containers, the MH- 5 
committee named a new subcommittee to look at “de -
196 • Chapter 7
mountable containers”—the sort that could be moved 
among ships, trains, and trucks. The chairman was Mat-
son chief engineer Harlander, and now, in contrast to 
1961, Sea- Land officials were prominent participants. At 
the first meeting, at the Flying Carpet Motel in Pitts -
burgh, Harlander surrendered the chair and made an ap-
peal for Matson’s 24- foot container size to be accepted 
as standard. He was followed by Sea- Land’s chief engi-
neer, Ron Katims, who called for the subcommittee to 
recognize 35- foot containers as well. Sea- Land’s con -
tainers, the subcommittee was told, tended to hit weight 
limits long before they were filled to physical capacity, 
so 40- foot containers would not in practice hold more 
freight than 35- footers. With the longer size, however, 
Sea- Land would not be able to fit as many containers 
on each ship, forfeiting almost 1,800 tons of freight 
 capacity per vessel. Harlander then called for the sub-
committee to endorse 8½- foot- high containers as well. 
Marad’s representative asked that all three questions be 
tabled.
31
When discussions resumed in early 1966, the subcom-
mittee agreed to increase the “standard” height for con-
tainers to 8½ feet, but it split on whether to recommend 
a change in policy to make 24- foot and 35- foot contain-
ers “standard.” It bounced the entire issue up to the full 
MH- 5 committee. The MH- 5 committee itself then split. 
The dogged Hall, still pushing the standardization pro-
cess along despite failing health, remained convinced 
that all approved sizes should be mathematically related. 
The various maritime associations on the committee, 
most of whose members had by then adopted 20- foot or 
40- foot containers, had little incentive to cast a vote that 
Setting the Standard • 197
might force them to share government subsidies with 
Sea- Land and Matson. Five trucking associations, whose 
members picked up and delivered containers for Sea- 
Land and Matson, submitted votes by telegraph in favor 
of the two additional sizes, but their votes were disal -
lowed. Almost all of the government representatives in 
attendance abstained. With 15 no votes, 5 yes votes, and 
54 voters abstaining or absent, the MH- 5 committee had 
no consensus for anything. A revote the following year 
found the split persisting, with 24 participating organi-
zations favoring 24- foot containers and 28 against 
them.32
Faced with the prospect of competing against subsi -
dized competitors while being excluded from subsidies 
themselves, Sea- Land and Matson turned to Congress. 
Their lobbyists drafted legislation in 1967 to prohibit the 
government from using the sizes of containers or ship -
board container cells as a basis for awarding subsidies or 
freight. Representatives and senators were soon delving 
into the obscure details of containerization. Other ship 
lines urged that the government push adoption of stan-
dard containers so that any company could handle oth-
ers’ containers. “The key to automation is the existence 
of a standardized product,” British steamship executive 
G. E. Prior- Palmer testified. Sea- Land and Matson, com-
petitors charged, were disrupting the effort to make con-
tainers compatible around the world. Of 107 container- 
carrying ships under construction in September 1967, all 
but six, commissioned by Sea- Land and Matson, were 
designed around standard sizes. Marad concurred, argu-
ing that Sea- Land and Matson should accept the stan -
dards adopted by everyone else. Sea- Land could add five 
198 • Chapter 7
feet to each of its 25,000 containers and 9,000 chassis 
and alter all of its ships and cranes for about $35 million, 
acting Marad chief J. W. Gulick testified, and Matson,  
a much smaller company, could switch from 24- foot 
 containers to 20- foot containers at a cost of only $9 
million.33
Sea- Land and Matson, which had invested a com -
bined $300 million in containerization, were less con-
cerned about the cost of conversion than about the inef-
ficiency of doing business with equipment ill- suited to 
their needs. Matson president Stanley Powell testified 
that using 20- foot containers instead of 24- footers would 
raise his company’s operating costs by $500,000 per ship 
per year in service to the Far East, and would increase 
costs for trucks picking up and delivering containers as 
well. Malcom McLean followed, armed with a consul -
tant’s study showing that switching from 35-  to 40- foot 
containers in Sea- Land’s Puerto Rico service would re-
duce revenues by 7 percent and costs hardly at all. “I 
don’t care what size container is adopted as a stan -
dard,” he affirmed. “If the marketplace can find one 
that moves cheaper, that is the way the marketplace will 
dictate it and we want to be flexible enough to follow 
the marketplace.”34
The Senate passed their legislation, but Matson sensed 
that a compromise would be needed to get the bill 
through the House. On the spur of the moment, Powell 
told a House committee that Matson wanted Marad to 
subsidize two ships with a radically new feature, adjust-
able steel cells for container stowage. The ships would 
initially carry only 24- foot containers, but if market re-
quirements changed, the frames could be adjusted so 20- 
Setting the Standard • 199
foot containers could be carried in the same space. This 
new feature, Powell said, would add only $65,000 to  
the $13 million cost. No such design existed; the entire 
scheme, cost estimate and all, had been drawn up on the 
floor of a hotel room the previous night. No matter: 
Congress ordered Marad not to discriminate against 
companies using nonstandard containers, Matson was 
granted its construction subsidy—and, when the com -
pany decided years later to switch from 24- foot contain-
ers to 40- foot containers, the adjustable cells conceived 
to satisfy a congressional committee made the shift cheap 
and easy.35
Two controversies remained. The MH- 5 committee 
undertook a futile effort to make containers compatible 
with airplanes as well as with ships, trucks, and trains. 
The requirements were not easy to reconcile: air contain-
ers needed to be stronger than maritime containers, and 
they required smooth bottoms to travel on conveyor 
belts rather than corner fittings for lifting by cranes. 
After months of studies, it dawned on the engineers that 
shippers paying a premium for the speed of air freight 
would be unlikely to want their cargo carried in ships, 
and a separate standard was developed for air contain-
ers. Railroads raised a more serious problem, contending 
that containers needed heavier end walls. End walls bore 
no great loads when the containers were on ships, but the 
braking of a train could cause the end of a container to 
bump up against the end of the flatcar. Railroads in 
North America demanded end walls twice as strong as 
those needed by ship lines, to reduce the potential for 
damage claims. European railroads were even more con-
cerned, because differences in couplings caused more 
200 • Chapter 7
forceful contact between railcars in Europe. Maritime 
interests resisted stronger end walls, which meant more 
weight and higher manufacturing costs. With the TC104 
committee on their side, the railroads won the day, but 
not without cost; by one estimate, the requirement for 
stronger end walls added one hundred dollars to the cost 
of manufacturing a standard container.
36
By 1970, as the International Organization for Stan-
dardization prepared to publish the first full draft of its 
painstakingly negotiated standards, the bitter battles 
among competing economic interests were finally wind-
ing down. In hindsight, the process can be faulted in al-
most every particular. It led to corner fittings that were 
too weak and needed redesign. Several newly approved 
container sizes were uneconomic and were soon aban -
doned. The standards for end walls may have been exces-
sive, and the standards for lashing containers together on 
deck never quite added up. No one would declare that 
all of the subcommittees and task forces came up with 
an optimal result.
Yet after 1966, as truckers, ship lines, railroads, con-
tainer manufacturers, and governments reached compro-
mises on issue after issue, a fundamental change could be 
seen in the shipping world. The plethora of container 
shapes and sizes that had blocked the development of 
containerization in 1965 gave way to the standard sizes 
approved internationally. Leasing companies began to 
feel confident investing large sums in containers and 
moved into the field in a big way, soon owning more 
boxes than the ship lines themselves. Aside from Sea- 
Land, which still used mainly 35- foot containers, and 
Matson, which was gradually reducing its fleet of 24- 
Setting the Standard • 201
foot containers, almost all of the world’s major ship lines 
were using compatible containers. Finally, it was becom-
ing possible to fill a container with freight in Kansas City 
with a high degree of confidence that almost any trucks, 
trains, ports, and ships would be able to move it smoothly 
all the way to Kuala Lumpur. International container 
shipping could now become a reality.37
CHAPTER 8
Takeoff
The Ideal- X and the Hawaiian Merchant were small- 
scale demonstrations of the container’s potential. The 
Gateway City, in 1957, and the Hawaiian Citizen, in 
1960, offered powerful examples of the efficiency that 
container shipping could achieve once specialized ships 
and equipment were brought to bear. Yet in 1962, six 
years after it arrived on the scene, container shipping 
remained a very fragile business. In the East, it accounted 
for 8 percent of the general freight passing through the 
Port of New York but hardly any elsewhere, save Sea- 
Land’s bases in Jacksonville, Houston, and Puerto Rico. 
On the West Coast, a trifling 2 percent of general- cargo 
tonnage moved in containers. Most goods were still 
moved as they had been for decades, as loose freight in 
trucks, boxcars, or the holds of breakbulk ships. The 
container’s economic impact was almost nil.1
The leaders of the U.S. maritime industry were by no 
means unanimous that the container was the future. The 
steamship business was as tradition- bound as any in the 
country. Many of its most prominent executives were 
men who reveled in the romance of sea and salt air. They 
worked within a few blocks of one another in lower 
Takeoff • 203
Manhattan, and spent well- oiled luncheons comparing 
notes with their peers at haunts like India House and the 
Whitehall Club. For all of their earthy bluster, their busi-
nesses had survived thanks almost entirely to govern -
ment coddling. On domestic routes, government policy 
discouraged competition among ship lines. On interna-
tional routes, rates for every commodity were fixed by 
conferences, a polite term for cartels, and the most im-
portant cargo, military freight, was handed out among 
U.S.- flag carriers without the nuisance of competitive 
bidding. Decisions about buying, building, or selling 
ships, about leasing terminals, and about sailing new 
routes all depended on government directives. For men 
who had prospered in this environment, who loved the 
smells of the ocean and fondly referred to their ships as 
“she,” Malcom McLean’s wholly unromantic interest in 
moving freight in boxes had little appeal. It was all well 
and good for visionaries to proclaim that containers 
were a “must,” but the collective wisdom of the shipping 
industry held that they would never carry more than a 
tenth of the nation’s foreign trade.
2
New union agreements and progress toward stan -
dardization encouraged shipping executives to look 
more seriously at containerization. When they did, 
though, they saw a waterfront littered with costly mis-
takes. Malcom McLean himself had made them; the 
novel shipboard cranes he had installed proved to be a 
nightmare, breaking down frequently, with each break-
down delaying a ship. Matson, more cautious in its in-
vestments, nonetheless built two vessels to carry both 
bulk sugar and containers, losing the efficiency and quick 
turnaround of pure containerships. Luckenbach Steam-
204 • Chapter 8
ship Company had embarked on a $50 million scheme 
to operate five containerships between the East and West 
coasts, only to have to abandon the plan when govern-
ment aid was not forthcoming. The Erie and St. Law-
rence Corporation’s container service between Port 
Newark and Florida, inaugurated amid great fanfare in 
1960, ended six months later when paper manufacturers 
and food processors failed to provide enough freight.
3
What both transportation companies and shippers 
were slowly coming to grasp was that simply carrying 
ocean freight in big metal boxes was not a viable busi-
ness. Yes, it produced some savings: cranes, boxes, chas-
sis, and containerships eliminated much of the cost of 
loading and unloading vessels at the dock. Shippers, 
however, cared not about loading costs but about the 
total cost of delivering their products from factory to 
customer. By this standard, the advantages of container-
ization were less apparent. If a wholesaler was sending, 
say, three tons of water pumps from Cleveland to Puerto 
Rico, the pumps would have to be trucked to Sea- Land’s 
warehouse in Newark, removed from the truck, and con-
solidated into a container along with twenty or twenty- 
five tons of goods from other shippers. Upon arrival in 
Puerto Rico the contents would have to be removed from 
the container, sorted, and loaded into trucks for final 
delivery. There was only a limited amount of traffic, in-
volving fully loaded containers going from one shipper 
to one recipient over water, for which containerization 
indisputably made economic sense.4
Most big shippers had no pressing need to use coastal 
shipping services, whether containerized or not. They 
used ocean freight for exporting or importing—but only 
Takeoff • 205
a handful of containers were being carried on interna -
tional ships. Most freight shipments were domestic, 
going cross- country by truck or train. Not until con -
tainer technology affected land- based transportation 
costs would the container revolution take firm hold.5
Up through the end of World War II, trains had been the 
way that most companies moved their goods. Railways’ 
freight revenues were nine times those of intercity truck 
lines in 1945, when more than 400,000 carloads of man-
ufactured goods as well as most of the nation’s coal and 
grain were shipped by rail. The 1950s, though, were the 
decade of the truck. Better roads, including widespread 
construction of expressways, permitted larger trucks car-
rying heavier loads at higher speeds. The use of 40- foot 
trailers on superhighways instead of 28- foot trailers on 
congested two- lane roads led to large productivity gains 
that helped truckers take business from railroads. Truck-
ing companies’ intercity revenues doubled during the 
1950s, and growth would have been even higher if trucks 
owned by or operating under contract to manufacturers 
and retailers were included in the count. Meanwhile, 
railroad freight revenues were flat. By 1963, most manu-
factured goods, except automobiles, moved by truck.
6
The railroads’ greatest challenge came in the smallest 
but most lucrative part of their business, the handling of 
shipments too small to fill an entire boxcar from origin 
to destination. Less- than- carload shipments might vary 
in size from a few barrels of solvent to ten thousand 
pounds of nuts and bolts. In 1946, these small shipments 
made up less than 2 percent of railroads’ tonnage but 
brought in nearly 8 percent of their revenues. Handling 
206 • Chapter 8
these loads was inefficient, requiring railroad employees 
to move individual crates and cartons from one boxcar 
to another at connecting points at huge expense. Truck-
ers went after the market with a vengeance, and nearly 
three- quarters of the railroads’ less- than- carload busi-
ness shifted to the highways within a decade.7
The loss of traffic that had always been theirs forced 
railroad executives to do some serious thinking about 
what their companies could still do best. The obvious 
answer was to concentrate on their strength—the ability 
to carry heavy loads over long distances at relatively low 
cost. One potential type of load grabbed their attention: 
trucks. Driving a truck from California to New York 
could require one hundred man- hours behind the wheel 
in the days before coast- to- coast expressways, plus time 
for meals and rest. Sending the truck trailer by train for 
the long- distance part of its journey could cut these labor 
costs while preserving trucks’ greatest advantage, the 
ability to pick up and deliver at any location. Railroads 
had offered a service like this as early as 1885, when 
Long Island Railroad “farmers’ trains” transported pro-
duce wagons to ferry landings opposite New York City; 
four wagons rode on each specially designed freight car, 
while the farmers and their horses traveled in separate 
cars. An updated version appeared in the early 1950s, as 
railroads began to chain truck trailers to flatcars. They 
called it “piggyback.”
8
Piggyback, like almost every innovation in transporta-
tion during that era, faced a very large obstacle: the In-
terstate Commerce Commission. The ICC regulated the 
rates and services of both trains and interstate trucks. It 
had quashed railroads’ attempts to carry truck trailers in 
Takeoff • 207
1931 under its mandate to avoid unfair and destructive 
competition. Putting trailers on trains confounded the 
ICC’s basic instincts, but in 1954 it finally outlined the 
conditions under which railroads could transport freight 
in trailers without submitting to regulation as motor 
 carriers. Over time, the commission approved several 
“plans” that permitted piggyback without upsetting the 
structure of regulation. Plan I let truckers serving the 
general public—common carriers, in legal parlance—
collect the cargo from shippers, put their trailers on a 
train, and split the revenue with the railroad, but only if 
the train was operating along a route that the truck line 
had authority to serve. Plan II allowed the railroad to 
own trailers and deal directly with shippers, but the ship-
pers might have to use their own trucks to haul the trail-
ers from a rail yard to the final destination. When it 
 became clear that these conditions would not allow 
piggy back freight to prosper, the ICC approved other 
plans so that railroads could move trailers, or even flat-
cars, owned by freight forwarders or by shippers them-
selves. This was a huge relief to the railroads, whose fi-
nancial woes were making it increasingly hard to come 
up with the money for new investments. Looser regula-
tion opened the way for piggyback to grow.
9
Piggyback solved a difficult operational problem for 
the railroads, the inefficient use of their large fleets of 
boxcars. U.S. railroads owned 723,962 boxcars in 1955 
but got very little use from them. The typical boxcar 
spent as little as 8 percent of its life under way, earning 
revenue. The rest of the time it was a warehouse on 
wheels, waiting on sidings to be loaded, unloaded, or 
added to a train. The fact that piggyback flatcars could 
208 • Chapter 8
be put back to work as soon as the trailers had been re-
moved freed the railroads from their role as unwilling 
providers of free storage. For shippers, on the other 
hand, piggyback, like containerization, initially offered 
few real cost advantages. Every railroad used different 
types of cars, so one railroad might be unable to unload 
a trailer from a flatcar originated on another line—a seri-
ous problem, given that no railroad spanned the entire 
country. Loading was cumbersome, often done “circus 
style”: empty flatcars were lined up end to end, with 
metal bridges between them, and a truck backed each 
trailer along the decks of the cars to the last empty posi-
tion. Most flatcars carried just one trailer, so making up 
a train could require switching and coupling a very 
large number of cars. Volume was too small for the rail-
roads to justify the investments needed to make piggy-
back a truly efficient service. In addition to these opera-
tional deficiencies, the Teamsters union, whose members 
drove most intercity trucks, opposed a system that re-
duced the need for its members’ labor, and it negotiated 
contracts that penalized truck lines for shipping trailers 
by train. Piggyback was a tiny business: although thirty- 
two railroads carried trailers on flatcars in 1955, total 
traffic amounted to only 0.4 percent of the railroads’ 
carloadings.10
In July 1954, the mighty Pennsylvania Railroad began 
service between New York and Chicago with 50- foot 
flatcars carrying a single trailer apiece. Within months, 
its daily TrucTrains to Chicago and St. Louis, equipped 
with new 75- foot flatcars, were carrying hundreds of 
trailers each way. The Pennsy signed up 150 motor car-
riers to pick up and deliver the trailers, and soon had a 
Takeoff • 209
$100- million- a- year business. It created a research- and- 
development department—a highly unusual step for a 
railroad—and charged it with improving TrucTrain. The 
biggest hurdle, TrucTrain’s managers decided, was that 
the Pennsy could not transfer loaded cars to many con-
necting railroads. In November 1955, TrucTrain was in-
corporated as Trailer Train Company, and other rail -
roads were invited to buy in. The idea was simple: instead 
of each railroad’s operating its own small trailer busi -
ness, Trailer Train would handle truck trailers nation -
wide. It would own the flatcars, collect revenue from 
truck lines, and pay the railroads to haul its cars over 
their tracks. At the end of the year, any profit would be 
divided among the railroads that had become sharehold-
ers. Trailer Train started small, operating barely 500 flat-
cars in 1956. Other railroads quickly joined the enter -
prise, allowing Trailer Train to gain economies of scale 
beyond the reach of individual railroads. By 1957, the 
company was buying a fleet of 85- foot flatcars, enabling 
it to boost efficiency by carrying two of the new 40- foot 
truck trailers on a single car.
11
Three major railroads stood apart, unconvinced that 
the complications of loading trailers aboard flatcars were 
worth the trouble. In 1957, the New York Central, the 
Pennsylvania’s direct competitor, developed a service 
called Flexi- Van. Flexi- Van used containers—special 
truck trailers that could be separated from their under -
carriages through the removal of four pins. It carried 
them on flatcars with turntables that swung 90 degrees. 
A truck would back up against the side of the flatcar, the 
driver would release the pins to detach the trailer, and the 
detached trailer, with no wheels, would slide from its 
210 • Chapter 8
undercarriage along rails built into the turntable. When 
half of the container was atop the turntable, the driver 
would engage an extra wheel beneath the truck tractor 
to move it sideways, into a position parallel to the freight 
car, moving the container and turntable along with it. 
The driver would then release the container from the 
truck and push the turntable the rest of the way into 
position. The procedure made Flexi- Van containers 
much easier to load than full trailers, and made it pos-
sible to load or remove a single container without dis -
turbing any other part of the train. Flexi- Van moved at 
passenger- train speeds, delivering containers from Chi-
cago to New York in seventeen hours.12
In the Midwest, the Missouri Pacific Railroad took an 
entirely different approach. The Missouri Pacific’s truck-
ing operation used detachable truck bodies with hooks 
on the top. A driver would bring his truck alongside the 
train, beneath a wheeled crane wide enough to straddle 
both the train and the truck. The driver removed some 
pins to separate the trailer body from the undercarriage 
and then operated the crane himself to lift the container 
onto the railcar, with the entire operation taking less 
than ten minutes. The Southern Railway also chose con-
tainers rather than trailers as the best way to handle 
freight between the South and New England, where it 
had customers but no rail lines. By striking agreements 
with truckers to haul the trailers between its terminus in 
Washington, D.C., and points farther north, the South-
ern overcame its inability to send conventional trailers 
on flatcars through the low- ceilinged tunnels in Balti -
more and New York. None of these three railroads, of 
course, could interchange containers with each other, 
Takeoff • 211
much less with the railroads participating in Trailer 
Train. As with ship lines, so too with railroads: by the 
late 1950s, the drive to simplify freight handling had led 
to incompatible solutions.13
The railroads’ desire to expand piggyback left the ICC 
in a quandary. In the early days of piggyback, the rail -
roads’ rates, like truck rates, had been based on the com-
modity being carried. Piggyback rates for any commod-
ity were about the same as truck rates and a bit higher 
than rates for shipping in boxcars. That suited the regu-
lators fine, because it let the railroads pick up a little 
traffic without shaking up the freight business. Pan- 
Atlantic’s combined water- road rates along the Atlantic 
Coast were 5 to 7.5 percent below railroads’ boxcar 
rates, also in line with ICC precedents that let water car-
riers charge less for slower service. But then, late in 1957, 
the railroads tried to cut some piggyback rates to com-
pete better against Pan- Atlantic and also Seatrain Lines, 
which carried loaded railcars aboard ships. Predictably, 
Pan- Atlantic and Seatrain objected that lower railroad 
rates would drive them out of business.14
As the ICC was trying to figure out how to help the 
railroads without hurting the ship lines, Congress inter-
vened—with conflicting instructions. Congress wanted 
to “breathe into our whole system of transportation 
some new competition,” Florida senator George Smathers 
explained. But while it wanted the economy to benefit 
from lower rates and new services, Congress also wanted 
to protect transportation companies and their workers. 
The result was the Transportation Act of 1958. In a sin-
gle remarkable sentence, the law ordered the ICC not to 
keep any carrier’s rates high to protect another mode of 
212 • Chapter 8
transportation, while also directing it to block unfair or 
destructive competition. The commission, it seemed, 
could no longer use high rail rates to protect ship lines 
or truckers—but at the same time it was to make sure 
that the ship lines and truckers were not driven out of 
business. In confusion, the ICC told the railroads that 
their piggyback rates should be about 6 percent higher 
than Pan- Atlantic’s ship- truck rates. The ICC was deci-
sively reversed in the courts, which gave the railroads the 
freedom to lower piggyback rates so long as the rates 
covered all of their costs.15
The court rulings permitting lower rates made the eco-
nomics of piggyback freight compelling. Trucking com-
panies’ costs were still lowest for short journeys, and the 
rates charged to shippers were correspondingly lower. 
Over longer distances, though, trucks’ total cost per mile 
declined only slightly, because drivers’ pay and fuel, the 
most important costs, increased along with distance. 
Railroads’ total costs per mile, on the other hand, de -
clined sharply with distance; once the trailers or contain-
ers were loaded on board, running the train came cheap. 
For distances exceeding five hundred miles, piggyback 
freight clearly was cheaper to provide than traditional 
truck service. Even private truckers, who had contracts 
with particular shippers, could not match the cost of 
trailer- on- flatcar service over long distances.16
The railroads were in the happy situation of being 
able to pass their lower costs on to customers and still 
earn better profits than they did carrying freight the 
 traditional way, in boxcars. Freight forwarders took ad-
vantage of the rate difference, arranging to consolidate 
smaller shipments into full carloads, for which they 
Takeoff • 213
could demand lower rail rates. Manufacturers such as 
General Electric and Eastman Kodak quickly discovered 
that there was money to be saved by organizing their 
production so they could fill trailers or containers and 
ship them to a single recipient by train, rather than send-
ing a few cases or crates by truck. By 1967, three- quarters 
of all manufactured goods (excluding coal and petro -
leum products) left the factory in shipments of at least 
thirty thousand pounds. Processed food, fresh meats, 
iron and steel products, soaps, and beer made the switch 
to piggyback first, but large quantities of everything from 
oranges to wallboard were soon riding on rails for the 
first time in two decades.17
To be sure, there were still some regulatory oddities. 
The ICC let railroads carry trailers at a flat rate per mile 
so long as the cargo was mixed, but if a trailer contained 
more than a certain percentage of any single commodity, 
the shipper would have to pay the specific rate for that 
commodity. Big shippers, though, were accustomed to 
such regulatory impediments. They saw not only that 
piggyback could save money, but that lower transport 
Table 4. Cost of Moving 20,000 Pounds of Freight, 1959
Distance Truck Rail Boxcar
Flatcar with  
One Trailer*
500 miles $244.47 $206.67 $236.59
1,000 miles $445.86 $337.11 $404.14
1,500 miles $647.13 $467.56 $571.69
Note: Rail costs are “fully distributed,” including overhead and profit margin.
Source: Kenneth Holcomb. See note 8 to this chapter.
*Cost per trailer, assuming that each contained 20,000 pounds of freight.
214 • Chapter 8
costs would let them sell their goods in cities that had 
always been too expensive to ship to. As the railroads 
increased train speeds, the time needed to deliver a truck 
trailer from Chicago to California fell from five days to 
three. Goods spent less time in transit, so inventory costs 
fell as well. The number of piggyback carloadings dou-
bled between 1958 and 1960, then doubled again by 
1965. Flexi- Van provided an astonishing 14 percent of 
all revenue earned by the New York Central in 1964. 
Trailer Train, which had less than $1 million in revenue 
in 1956, became a $50 million business in 1965 and 
owned 28,000 freight cars.18
International trade was not remotely a consideration 
when American railroads began their aggressive pursuit 
of trailer traffic in the mid- 1950s. Yet the potential for 
linking piggyback freight and container shipping was ap-
parent from the earliest days. Most piggyback loads 
were truck trailers, complete with wheels, that would 
never travel by ship. About 10 percent of piggyback ship-
ments, however, involved trailers detached from wheels, 
an increasing number of which complied with the stan-
dards for container sizes and lifting methods that the 
American Standards Association had been developing 
since 1959. Standard containers were already flowing 
freely to and from Canada, where railroads had em -
braced piggyback even more eagerly than in the United 
States.
19
It was the indefatigable Morris Forgash who finally 
got regular intercontinental container service under way. 
Starting in 1960, his United States Freight Company 
began moving containers from the United States to Japan, 
Takeoff • 215
using U.S. railroads, Japanese truckers, and the mixed- 
cargo ships of States Marine Lines. A year later, the New 
York Central, equipped with 5,000 new Flexi- Van con-
tainers, began similar services to Japan and Europe. 
United States Lines, the largest U.S. line handling general 
cargo, carried Southern Railway containers on experi -
mental voyages to Europe. The U.S. Army, supporting 
hundreds of thousands of troops in Europe, began trials 
sending 40- foot containers across the ocean.
20
These first international efforts were small in scale. 
Malcom McLean wanted to sail to Europe in 1961, and 
his staff dissuaded him: the company was not ready for 
such a large venture. No ship line was sailing fully con-
tainerized ships to Asia or Europe, so the containers were 
lodged in a few cells built into one of the holds of a 
breakbulk ship or carried with a load of mixed cargo. 
Most of the cargo on these vessels was traditional freight 
that had to be handled one piece at a time, so loading 
and unloading took almost as long as for voyages with-
out containers. Shippers saved no money by using con-
tainers internationally, because the conferences that set 
ocean freight rates gave them no preference: the rate for 
a single container holding 20 tons of auto parts was 
roughly the same as the rate for 20 tons of auto parts 
shipped in dozens of wooden crates. The containers were 
usually returned across the ocean empty, and that cost, 
too, had to be reflected in the rates. Aside from less theft, 
from the shipper’s viewpoint the only real attraction of 
these early international container services was reduced 
paperwork. Rather than arranging and paying for each 
stage of the journey separately, as they always had, ship-
pers could ask a freight forwarder to quote a single rate 
216 • Chapter 8
for the entire land- sea- land shipment from America to 
Asia, and could pay for it with a single check.21
Viewed at the start of 1965, the balance on containeriza-
tion’s first nine years was positive but unspectacular. In 
New York, container tonnage had hit a plateau, and the 
International Longshoremen’s Association remained vo-
ciferously opposed to its growth. On the West Coast, 
even after rapid growth, only about 8 percent of general 
cargo was moving in containers. Some railroads were 
using containers that in theory could be interchanged 
with ship lines, but in practice rail- ship container traffic 
was negligible. The trucking companies that used de -
mountable containers did so mainly under contracts 
with Sea- Land and Matson; otherwise, truckers over -
whelmingly preferred trailers that were permanently at-
tached to their wheels and could not easily be loaded 
aboard ships. Container shipping looked to be a viable 
enough business, producing $94 million of revenue for 
Sea- Land in 1964, but it was a niche business. The way 
most manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers moved 
their goods had hardly changed.22
Behind the scenes, though, the prerequisites for the 
container revolution were falling into place. Dock labor 
costs were poised to fall massively thanks to union agree-
ments on both coasts. International agreements were in 
place on standards for container sizes and lifting meth-
ods, even if few containers yet met those standards. 
Wharves designed for container handling were on the 
way. Manufacturers had learned to organize their facto-
ries so that they could save money by shipping large 
loads in single units to take advantage of containeriza-
Takeoff • 217
tion. Railroads, truckers, and freight forwarders had 
grown familiar with switching trailers and containers 
from one conveyance to another to move what was now 
being called “intermodal” freight. Regulators were cau-
tiously encouraging competition so that carriers could 
pass some of the cost savings from containerization on 
to their customers. Only one crucial ingredient was miss-
ing: ships.
The ships that had launched the container era all had 
been leftovers, dating to World War II. As of 1965, every 
containership in Sea- Land’s fleet was at least two de -
cades old, and Matson’s youngest had been launched in 
1946. These older vessels, obtained from the U.S. gov -
ernment’s fleet at bargain- basement prices, were slow 
and small, but they allowed the container pioneers to get 
under way without huge amounts of capital. As other 
companies tested containerization in the early 1960s, 
they generally used converted World War II freighters as 
well. The cost of building brand- new vessels was too 
great for many companies to handle, even with govern-
ment subsidies, and the risks of guessing wrong about 
future trends in cargo handling were extremely high.23
No one was more aware that the world was about to 
change than Malcom McLean. He was already fully 
committed to the container. Outracing any potential 
competitors, Sea- Land had converted seven vessels into 
containerships between 1961 and 1963. The converted 
ships allowed it to open West Coast service in 1962 and 
then to buy Alaska Freight Lines in 1964, but at the cost 
of increasing its debt from $8.5 million to $60 million  
in just two years. By 1964, far greater financing needs 
loomed as Sea- Land began to look at Europe. Once word 
218 • Chapter 8
of McLean’s next destination got out, the big American 
companies would surely enter the transatlantic container 
trade, and the European ship lines were bound to join in 
as well. To stay in the lead, McLean had no choice but to 
roll the dice once again. He did it by arranging two more 
extraordinary financial transactions in 1965.
24
The first was with Daniel K. Ludwig, a man who had 
much in common with Malcom McLean. Ludwig, born 
in 1897, had entered the shipping business at age nine-
teen by transporting molasses around the Great Lakes. 
Like McLean, he ran his business with a legendary focus 
on costs; according to one famous story, he bought a 
tanker called the Anahuac and decided to keep the  
name because “it would have cost $50 to paint it out.” 
By the 1950s his National Bulk Carriers was the largest 
American- owned ship line, and Ludwig was one of the 
world’s wealthiest men. His holdings included American- 
Hawaiian Steamship Company, a shell since it stopped 
operating ships in 1953. Ludwig had watched Mc-  
Lean’s container venture carefully, and in January 1961 
American- Hawaiian suddenly applied for $100 million 
in federal subsidies to build ten high- speed ships and 
open an intercoastal service through the Panama Canal. 
Sea- Land promptly announced its own entry into the 
intercoastal route and spent the next year successfully 
blocking Ludwig’s bid for subsidies. Ludwig pared his 
subsidy request to three ships, to be powered by nuclear 
reactors, but then decided that the best way to profit 
from container shipping was to invest in Sea- Land in -
stead. In early 1965, when McLean Industries’ shares 
were trading for $13 apiece, the company issued one 
million shares of stock to American- Hawaiian for $8.50 
Takeoff • 219
per share, and Ludwig joined the company’s board of 
directors. It was the first act of what would prove to be 
a long- running collaboration between Ludwig and Mal-
com McLean.
25
The second deal involved Litton Industries. Litton, 
founded in the 1930s to make radio tubes, had been re-
shaped during the 1950s into a new type of company, a 
“conglomerate.” Among its far- flung holdings was the 
Ingalls Shipyard in Pascagoula, Mississippi. Litton, like 
the other conglomerates of the day, was bent on fast 
growth, and it was eager for Ingalls to diversify away 
from naval contracts into commercial work. McLean 
needed ships but had no money; Litton was rolling in 
money but desperate to keep its shipyard busy.
Negotiations led to the creation of a company called 
Litton Leasing. On November 5, 1964, Sea- Land sold 
Litton nine containerships for $28 million, using the pro-
ceeds to help pay off $35 million in bank loans. Litton 
immediately leased the ships back to Sea- Land. Litton 
took other ships formerly belonging to the Waterman 
operation, which McLean was selling off. It widened 
them, lengthened them, and installed container cells to 
meet Sea- Land’s specifications. For an annual rent that 
came to $14.6 million, the cash- strapped ship line was 
able to add eighteen containerships to its fleet in just four 
years. For good measure, Litton agreed to swap its con-
vertible stock for 800,000 McLean Industries shares, im-
mediately strengthening Sea- Land’s stretched balance 
sheet by $6.8 million.26
Sea- Land’s quick moves to acquire a huge new fleet 
opened the floodgates. During eight short weeks in the 
late summer of 1965, no fewer than twenty- six contain-
220 • Chapter 8
ership projects hit the headlines. Each required $8 to $10 
million to convert a ship and another $1–$2 million for 
chassis and containers. For an industry notoriously tight 
with its cash, a total investment of a quarter billion dol-
lars to enter a trade that might not generate business was 
almost incomprehensible. Companies that had watched 
containerization from a distance for years, curious but 
noncommittal, now felt that they had to put up real 
money or be swept away in the flood. Not all of them 
were eager. When Sea- Land threw a party at the Rotter-
dam Hilton to introduce its service to Dutch shippers at 
the start of 1966, its guests booed, and the head of 
Holland- America Line, itself preparing to carry contain-
ers, told a Sea- Land executive, “You come back with the 
next ship and take all the containers home.”
27
The established carriers’ great fear was that containers 
would force down freight rates. Four conferences, one 
covering traffic each way between North America and 
northern Europe and the other two dealing with cargo 
between North America and the British Isles, set the rates 
for every commodity in their trades. They naturally had 
no provisions for containers.
Joining the conferences was not essential for Sea- 
Land, although belonging would surely smooth its way 
in dealings with European governments and ports. For 
United States Lines, already a conference member, con-
ference rules on containers were critical. McLean or -
dered his representatives to seek admission to the east-
bound and westbound North Atlantic Continental 
Freight Conferences, and to do so without causing fights. 
After Sea- Land proclaimed that it had no desire to start 
a rate war, the doors were opened. Sea- Land and United 
Takeoff • 221
States Lines put forth two proposed rules: moving con-
tainers between piers and warehouses should be cheap, 
and ocean freight rates should include the use of steam-
ship lines’ containers and chassis, so that shippers would 
not have to pay extra. Their European competitors, con-
templating container services themselves, accepted both 
requests. “We didn’t ask for any big concessions,” a Sea- 
Land executive recalled. “We just asked them to accom-
modate the container. And, you know, I think that was a 
big mistake they made, but they did.” A European ship-
ping executive remembered things differently: “They’re 
afraid of Sea- Land,” he said, “but they would rather keep 
an eye on them from the inside than have them on the 
outside and wonder what they’re doing.” Whatever the 
case, Sea- Land was able to enter the North Atlantic trade 
not as an outcast, but as a member of the club.28
Moore- McCormack Lines, a subsidized American car-
rier sailing between the East Coast and Scandinavia, 
opened the first transatlantic container service in March 
1966, using combination ships that carried truck trailers, 
containers, and mixed freight. United States Lines, also 
a subsidized operator, followed almost immediately, car-
rying 40 20- foot containers along with mixed freight in 
its holds. In April, after signing agreements with 325 Eu-
ropean truck lines to deliver its cargo to places like Basel 
and Munich, Sea- Land, with no government operating 
subsidy, began service on a totally different scale. Weekly 
sailings from Newark and Baltimore to Rotterdam and 
Bremerhaven carried 226 of its 35- foot containers.
All three carriers reported stunning efficiencies. Three 
medium- size containerships could handle as much trans-
atlantic freight as six breakbulk ships, with only half the 
222 • Chapter 8
capital cost and two- thirds of the operating cost, a con-
sultant reported. United States Lines found that at Port 
Elizabeth, one longshore gang with one crane could load 
as much in a ten- hour container operation as ten gangs 
handling conventional breakbulk freight. Moore- 
McCormack pegged the cost of loading containerized 
cargo at Port Elizabeth as $2.00 to $2.50 per ton, versus 
$16.00 per ton for conventional freight.
29
Two types of freight appear to have filled those first 
containers crossing the Atlantic: whiskey on the west -
bound run, military goods on the voyage to Europe. Li-
quor exporters had long complained of huge losses to 
theft on the docks, and convincing them to use contain-
ers was not a hard sell. Among Sea- Land’s first ports of 
call was Grangemouth, in Scotland, where it picked up 
Scotch whiskey. Sea- Land won the business with a tank 
container, made of stainless steel, designed to let export-
ers ship their whiskey in bulk for bottling in the United 
States. Two tank containers would fit neatly into a stan-
dard container cell on a Sea- Land ship, putting an end to 
the pilferage that had plagued the whiskey trade from 
time immemorial.
The military role was even more crucial. As a U.S.- flag 
carrier, Sea- Land was entitled to carry a portion of the 
freight for the quarter million U.S. soldiers in West Ger-
many, and the military, determined to push containeriza-
tion, channeled cargo Sea- Land’s way. According to in-
dustry rumor, more than 90 percent of the cargo on 
Sea- Land’s first transatlantic voyage was military freight. 
Military demand all but assured that Sea- Land’s first 
voyages would be profitable, and gave it an advantage 
that foreign carriers could not match. When the navy 
Takeoff • 223
finally overcame the objections of the breakbulk carriers 
and put European military shipping contracts out for 
competitive bids in the summer of 1966, Sea- Land un -
derpriced every American competitor and won all the 
traffic it could handle.30
Authoritative numbers on shipments during that first 
year of transatlantic container service do not exist. The 
vast majority of containers going to and from Europe 
flowed through New York harbor, and port data offer 
the best guide to the magnitude of the new trade. The 
port’s container tonnage, 1.95 million long tons in 1965, 
soared to 2.6 million tons in 1966, even though hardly 
any containers were carried during the first 10 weeks of 
the year. Faced with this heavy flow of cargo, more U.S. 
companies, two groups of British carriers, and a consor-
tium of Continental ship lines all raced to enter the con-
tainer trade. “In 1966, commitments by ship operators 
and ports to containers passed the point of no return,” a 
consultant judged.
31
Only three ship lines were offering international con-
tainer service from the United States in the spring of 
1966. By June 1967, one researcher counted 60 compa-
nies offering container service to Europe, Asia, and even 
Latin America (although only a handful used special 
containerships). More than 50,000 containers—enough 
to hold a half million tons of freight—crossed the ocean 
in the second half of 1967. Many carriers placed orders 
for brand- new containerships, designed to maximize the 
load of 8- foot- wide, 8- foot- high boxes that were quickly 
becoming the industry standard. In 1967, as the Port 
Authority touted a study showing that 75 percent of the 
Port of New York’s general cargo could move in contain-
224 • Chapter 8
ers, 64 container vessels were under construction by 12 
ship lines. Kerry St. Johnston, head of the British consor-
tium Overseas Containers Ltd., warned that so much 
new capacity would lead to rampant rate cutting, not a 
happy prospect for ship lines that were in the process of 
investing hundreds of millions of dollars in container 
equipment and ships.32
The new, fully containerized vessels began to come 
on- line in 1968. Ten containerships per week sailed the 
North Atlantic that year, carrying a total of 200,000 20- 
foot containers holding 1.7 million tons of freight. The 
European companies whose containerships had not yet 
been finished coped as best they could, piling containers 
on the decks of their breakbulk ships. They were able to 
provide their customers with some semblance of con -
tainer shipping, but with none of the efficiencies enjoyed 
by companies using fully containerized ships and high- 
speed cranes. “The costs were horrendous,” remembered 
Karl Heinz Sager, the head of the German ship line 
Hapag- Lloyd.33
So far as shippers were concerned, the only reason not 
to join the rush to container freight was the shortage of 
containers. Although U.S.- flag ship lines added 13,000 
containers between September 1966 and December 
1967, and European ship lines bought thousands more, 
empty boxes could be in short supply. Otherwise, the 
cost savings were compelling, even with the conferences 
controlling transatlantic rates. Chas. Bruning Co., a 
maker of office machines near Chicago, found that it 
could get its equipment delivered to inland points in Eu-
rope in an average of twelve days. In addition to cheaper 
ocean freight, Bruning saved money by eliminating spe-
Takeoff • 225
cial export packaging, damage, and theft, and got a 25 
percent discount on its insurance. So much traffic shifted 
so quickly that three years after containerships first 
sailed to Europe, only two American companies were 
still operating breakbulk ships across the North Atlantic, 
making a combined total of three sailings per month.34
The surge in transatlantic container traffic, coming at a 
time when American factories were running hard to meet 
the demands of a wartime economy, offered a golden 
opportunity for U.S. railroads to regain their place at the 
heart of the domestic transportation system. Their busi-
ness in conventionally packaged export cargo was dying. 
Thousands of containers were passing through New Jer-
sey and Baltimore every week, many of them going to or 
from factories in the industrial heartland of the upper 
Midwest. This huge scale offered no advantage to truck-
ers, because, no matter how many boxes were being 
handled, one truck could pull only one 40- foot box. 
Scale could bring real savings aboard trains, giving the 
railroads a way to recover some of the export traffic they 
were losing.
The European railroads saw things that way. The Eu-
ropeans had been trying to make a business with con -
tainers since the 1920s, and they were eager to strike 
deals with the ship lines. Almost as soon as transatlantic 
container shipping began, they offered flat per- container 
rates to draw traffic. In 1967, the French National Rail-
way charged a flat 572 francs to carry a loaded 40- foot 
container from Bremen, in North Germany, to Basel, in 
Switzerland, while the German Federal Railway charged 
$241 to take any 40- foot box from Bremen to Munich. 
226 • Chapter 8
In Britain, using dedicated trains to carry containers to 
and from the port at Felixstowe had been part of Sea- 
Land’s plan from the very beginning; British Rail, which 
had advanced its own proposal to operate dedicated con-
tainer trains to and from the ports as early as 1963, was 
an eager collaborator.35
American railroads, especially those in the East, were 
notably less enthusiastic. They feared that containers 
would draw shipments away from boxcars, bringing in 
less revenue. Most of them had already built ramps to 
load and unload truck trailers under the auspices of 
Trailer Train, and at a time when they were financially 
pressed, they had no desire to lay out additional money 
for overhead cranes and storage yards to handle con -
tainers. The New York Central had a successful opera-
tion with its unique Flexi- Van service, and it feared that 
maritime containers would siphon off Flexi- Van’s cus-
tomers. The railroads could not refuse to handle con -
tainers, but they could provide such poor service that no 
customer would want to ship them. In February 1966, 
the Pennsylvania Railroad delivered a flatcar holding 
two 20- foot containers to a Caterpillar Tractor ware-
house in York, Pennsylvania. The containers were loaded 
while sitting on the car on Caterpillar’s siding, and the 
railroad charged for the haul to New Jersey as if Cater -
pillar had simply loaded its parts into boxcars. The ship-
ment was billed as an experiment for American Export 
Lines, and the railroads were rooting for it to fail. “We 
hope that the high cost of loading, blocking and bracing, 
and the unloading of the containers plus the loss of the 
containers for 2 weeks with no offsetting per diem rev-
enue, will discourage their pursuing this avenue further,” 
Takeoff • 227
a New York Central official wrote his counterpart at the 
Pennsylvania.36
The eastern railroads commissioned a study, which 
urged them to act quickly to attract container traffic. The 
railroads chose to do the opposite. They agreed on a new 
rate structure to discourage containers, providing that 
any container weighing more than five hundred pounds 
would be charged on the basis of the weight and the 
contents, rather than receiving the lowest full- carload 
rate. In addition, they insisted on charging ship lines for 
carrying empty containers from the port to customers 
inland—hardly a policy that encouraged shippers to use 
rail for the land portion of international shipments. If 
those measures were not enough to deter container busi-
ness, some railroads simply drove it away. In the spring 
of 1967, when Whirlpool Corporation asked the New 
York Central to move containers of refrigerators from an 
Indiana factory to the New Jersey docks, the railroad 
advised Whirlpool to ship its refrigerators in boxcars 
and put them into containers at the port; Whirlpool 
shipped by truck instead. Matson’s plan to ship contain-
ers of Hawaiian pineapple cross- country by train met 
with similar hostility, because the rate for transporting 
the containers between Chicago and New Jersey was far 
below the standard per- ton rate for carrying canned 
goods. “It is extremely important that we defeat the pro-
posal,” a New York Central executive wrote.
37
Malcom McLean had a different vision. For him, rail-
roads, trucks, and ship lines were in the same business—
moving freight. He wanted to turn Sea- Land’s intrepid 
sales force loose to locate manufacturers exporting to 
Europe from Little Rock and Milwaukee. In 1966, as 
228 • Chapter 8
Sea- Land’s transatlantic service was getting under way, 
McLean Industries offered an audacious proposal to 
build railroad yards in Chicago and St. Louis, at its own 
expense. Freight forwarders owned by McLean Indus -
tries would collect freight from shippers, consolidate it 
into McLean- owned containers, and load the containers 
aboard McLean- owned railcars, specially designed by 
the Pullman Company to carry containers stacked two 
high. The Pennsylvania Railroad would pull McLean’s 
all- container train straight to a rail yard Sea- Land would 
build by the docks at Elizabeth, arriving in time to meet 
a Europe- bound ship, which would in turn connect with 
trucks and trains on a European dock. For the first time, 
a shipper a thousand miles from the sea would be able 
to buy not just international transportation but tightly 
scheduled international transportation. A seller could 
tell its customers when the goods were to arrive, with a 
reasonable likelihood that the schedule would be met.
38
The economic advantages of this truck- train- ship 
combination seemed overwhelming. Trucks would do 
the short- haul work for which they were best suited. 
Trains would handle the long land haul, where their 
costs were lowest. Shippers’ costs for the domestic leg of 
their international shipment would fall by half. The 
Pennsylvania was intrigued by the plan, the New York 
Central and the Baltimore and Ohio opposed. But as the 
Pennsylvania and the New York Central announced 
plans to merge, McLean’s ambitions were scuttled. The 
railroads made the minimum counteroffer that the ICC 
would allow: they would carry Sea- Land’s container 
cars—mixed in with other cars on their regular slow 
freights.39
Takeoff • 229
Once again, Malcom McLean was ahead of his time—
but with the railroads, he lacked the power to turn his 
vision into reality. Farsighted rail executives, such as 
Trailer Train president James P. Newell, realized that at-
tempts to preserve high boxcar freight rates were bound 
to fail; Newell estimated that railroads could save 30 
percent of their train and engine costs by running the 
sort of unit trains McLean had in mind. “Take those sav-
ings and divide them between the railroad and the ship-
per,” Newell advised. But in 1967 and 1968, the rail -
roads couldn’t be bothered. Their piggyback traffic was 
booming, up 30 percent in three years, in an economy 
white- hot from the Vietnam War. Their mind- set, rein-
forced by a century of regulation, did not encourage 
them to conquer new business. They were content to 
leave the land side of the new container shipping busi-
ness to trucks.
40
CHAPTER 9
Vietnam
In the winter of 1965, the United States government 
began a rapid buildup of military forces in Vietnam. In 
the process, it created what may have been the greatest 
logistical mess in the history of the U.S. armed forces. 
The resolution of that mess represented containeriza -
tion’s coming of age.1
Few places on earth were less suited to supporting a 
modern military force than South Vietnam in early 1965. 
The entire country, seven hundred miles long from north 
to south, had a single deepwater port, one railroad line 
that was largely inoperative, and a fragmentary highway 
system, mostly unpaved. The tasks of providing civilian 
aid and supplying the U.S. military “advisers” who had 
worked in Vietnam since the late 1950s—there were 
23,300 of them at the start of 1965—were already over -
whelming; by 1964, the small U.S. port detachment in 
Saigon was working twelve- hour shifts, seven days a 
week, to prevent a backlog of ships. The various Ameri-
can forces in the country had sixteen different logistical 
systems, a situation that led to endless competition for 
basic resources such as delivery trucks and warehouse 
space. There was no central system for keeping track of 
Vietnam • 231
arriving cargo, and the navy’s Military Sea Transporta-
tion Service (MSTS), which was responsible for charter-
ing merchant ships to haul supplies to Vietnam, did not 
even have an office in the country. So far as Washington 
was concerned, the entire operation in Vietnam was 
predicated on the assumption that all troops would be 
withdrawn in 1965. This political fig leaf meant that 
spending on docks, warehouses, and other permanent 
infrastructure was hard to justify.2
The logistical challenges were well known when Presi-
dent Lyndon Johnson ordered 65,000 U.S. soldiers and 
marines to Vietnam, along with several air force squad-
rons, in April 1965. Being aware of the problems, though, 
was not the same as resolving them. By June, when U.S. 
troop strength in- country had reached 59,900, the sup-
ply chain was already hopelessly tangled. Ships coming 
from California anchored outside Vietnamese harbors, 
but getting their cargo safely ashore was almost impos-
sible: the harbors were so shallow that oceangoing ships 
could not reach the piers. Instead, a barge or a landing 
ship tank (LST), an amphibious vehicle longer than a 
football field but with a very shallow draft, would serve 
as a ferry. The barge or LST would tie up to the larger 
ship, whose crew would off- load the cargo painstakingly, 
often by placing crates or boxes into nets that were low-
ered by rope. The process was so slow that barges carry-
ing ammunition from ships near Nha Be required ten to 
thirty days to make a single round trip to shore. At Qui 
Nhon, LSTs brought cargo directly onto the beach and 
lowered their huge ramps to let trucks and forklifts in-
side, but unloading them still took eight days. At Da 
Nang, oceangoing ships had to drop their cargo into 
232 • Chapter 9
lighters four miles out at sea. Coastal ships with less than 
a five- meter draft could reach the dock, but the port was 
repeatedly thrown into chaos when they arrived without 
advance notice. Storms, common during the summer 
monsoon, could bring the intricate unloading process to 
a halt.
3
The situation in Saigon was even worse. Vietnam’s 
only deepwater port, located on the Saigon River forty- 
five miles from the South China Sea, was a major bottle-
neck. Tonnage rose by half during 1965, and the port 
was simply overwhelmed. There were no cranes and few 
forklifts, leaving almost everything to be handled by 
muscle power. Ships carrying military cargoes, commer-
cial cargoes, U.S. foreign aid, and food relief shipments 
competed for one of only ten berths. Once a vessel un-
loaded, its cargo often sat for days on the dock. Military 
recipients often did not know that they had freight com-
ing. Commercial importers were accustomed to leaving 
their goods at the port as long as possible to put off the 
payment of customs duties. Cargo theft, much of it or -
chestrated by South Vietnamese generals, was so wide -
spread that U.S. military police rode shotgun on the 
trucks taking cargo from the docks to military ware -
houses. Long port delays worsened the shortage of U.S.- 
flag ships that had forced the MSTS to activate the rusti-
est merchant vessels in the government- owned reserve 
fleet. “Military cargo requirement [sic] as of this date 
have been met only by accepting delivery of the cargo at 
dates later than desired,” the agency’s acting commander 
admitted in May 1965. Lacking warehouse space, army 
and air force commanders treated cargo ships as floating 
warehouses, making shipping problems worse. “Saigon 
Vietnam • 233
just became a burying ground,” a high- ranking naval of-
ficer recalled. “Ships would move up the river and they 
would stay, and stay, and stay, not be offloaded. The 
Army would argue that the press of war was such that 
they couldn’t get the stuff ashore. Air Force didn’t bother 
to argue, the ship was there, period, we’ve got it and 
when we are ready we’ll let it go.”4
Confusing everything was the decision by the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff to run a “push” supply system. In contrast 
to a “pull” system, in which units in the field would re-
quest the supplies they needed, the push system required 
supply experts back in the United States to decide what 
to send. The Army Materiel Command shipped more 
than one million automatic resupply packets, providing 
equipment and spare parts based on assumptions about 
how much a normal unit in the field would require. Sup-
ply depots in California made similar judgments about 
needs for food, clothing, communications gear, and build-
ing supplies. The supply experts “had never had grease 
under their fingernails,” a top army general groused, and 
from a distance of thousands of miles they had no actual 
knowledge of the rapidly changing situation in the field. 
Nor were they familiar with Vietnam.
5
In terms of getting supplies to the field as quickly as 
possible, the push system was a success. Spending by the 
Army Materiel Command, the agency that bought the 
army’s weaponry, soared from $7.4 billion in fiscal year 
1965 to $14.3 billion the following year as ammunition, 
weapons, building materials, and vehicles were pumped 
into Vietnam. What finally arrived there, though, was 
always unexpected and often unneeded or unwanted. 
Food supplies flooded in, then were suddenly cut off 
234 • Chapter 9
when it became clear that there was far too much on 
hand. Conex boxes, the five- ton steel containers favored 
by the military, would arrive with mixed loads of weap-
ons, boots, fatigues, and assorted odds and ends, leaving 
quartermasters without enough of any one item to outfit 
their units. Troops on the ground often ran short of pro-
visions and essential supplies.
6
A month before the Joint Chiefs had given final ap -
proval for the troop buildup, William Westmoreland, the 
U.S. military commander, and James S. Killen, head of 
the U.S. foreign aid mission, had agreed that the best way 
to keep Vietnam supplied was to expand the port at Da 
Nang, a small city 430 miles north of Saigon. The con-
cept was that Da Nang could receive ships arriving di-
rectly from the United States, diverting traffic from Sai-
gon. This plan could not be executed quickly; Da Nang 
had shallow water and no cargo- handling equipment, 
and the main landing ramps for LSTs were in the middle 
of a major street. In April 1965, Westmoreland recom-
mended that the United States instead focus on develop-
ing Cam Ranh Bay, 300 miles south of Da Nang, as a 
“second major deep water port and logistics complex.” 
Defense secretary Robert McNamara assented in May, 
and army engineers quickly arrived to begin work on an 
airfield. Construction of piers, warehouses, and a huge 
maintenance complex was to follow. The logistical units 
that had been assigned to smaller ports were soon shifted 
to Cam Ranh Bay. In July, Westmoreland created a 
wholly new unit, the First Logistical Command, with re-
sponsibility for port operations, supply, and maintenance 
across all of South Vietnam, including the new Cam 
Ranh operation.7
Vietnam • 235
Cam Ranh Bay was the largest natural harbor on the 
Vietnamese coast, but it was not an easy place to build a 
logistical complex. It had no infrastructure, and the shift-
ing sands along the shore were hospitable neither to 
earthmoving equipment nor to standard construction 
techniques. Aside from the harbor, the location had one 
important feature: there was no South Vietnamese facil-
ity at the site. The dismal performance of the Vietnamese- 
run Saigon port preoccupied U.S. officials at the highest 
level, so much so that Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge 
personally discussed port problems with South Vietnam-
ese premier Nguyen Cao Ky in July 1965. These efforts 
made little headway: control over the port was too lucra-
tive for top South Vietnamese generals, who resisted U.S. 
proposals that a new port authority should take over. 
The port at Cam Ranh Bay would ease those problems 
by being entirely a U.S.- run operation, free of Vietnamese 
corruption and inefficiency. Some top U.S. policymakers 
even envisioned a model community surrounded by in-
dustrial parks and residential subdivisions instead of the 
usual bars and brothels. The fastest way to get the port 
up and running was to bring in a DeLong pier, a three- 
hundred- foot barge with holes through which pilings 
could be driven into the harbor floor; the barge could 
then be jacked up on the pilings to the desired height 
above the water. The navy located a DeLong pier in South 
Carolina, towed it through the Panama Canal and across 
the sea to Cam Ranh Bay, and anchored navy ships in the 
harbor to provide temporary electrical power—and the 
port was in operation. By December, merchant ships 
were arriving directly from the United States, and more 
DeLong piers were under construction.
8
236 • Chapter 9
Yet the supply problems kept growing worse. Every 
month, 17,000 additional U.S. troops were landing in 
Vietnam. Each 830- man infantry battalion hit the beach 
with 451 tons of supplies and equipment, each mecha-
nized battalion with 1,119 tons. Feeding, clothing, and 
arming the troops after arrival was using every ship the 
MSTS could lay its hands on. By Thanksgiving 1965, 45 
ships were being worked in Vietnamese ports—and 75 
more, loaded with food, weapons, and ammunition, 
were holding off the coast or in the Philippines, where 
they were sent to avoid the higher pay to which mer -
chant seamen were entitled while their ships were in 
Vietnamese waters. “Ten first class ports in CONUS [the 
continental United States] are shipping material to SVN 
[South Vietnam] as fast as they can—we have four 
second- class ports to receive it,” the head of the military’s 
trucking branch complained. When the defense secretary 
and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff visited Viet-
nam in November 1965, they got an earful about logisti-
cal problems. “Our ports are jammed with ships and 
cargo,” the head of the First Logistical Command told 
them. Life magazine ran photos of Saigon port conges-
tion in December, and a visiting congressman advised 
Westmoreland to place more emphasis on the ports. The 
logistical mess in Vietnam was starting to become a po-
litical embarrassment at home.
9
Washington demanded solutions. Under heavy pres -
sure, the South Vietnamese government agreed in late 
1965 that the United States could build a new deepwater 
port, appropriately called Newport, in Saigon, so it could 
move military freight away from the downtown docks. 
The Pentagon simplified the supply chain by overruling 
Vietnam • 237
navy objections and making the U.S. Army responsible 
for supplying all allied forces in Vietnam, including the 
famously independent Marine Corps. And, on orders di-
rectly from the secretary of defense, the MSTS hired a 
private company, Alaska Barge and Transport Co., to 
take charge of coastal shipping. Alaska Barge earned its 
living delivering cargo to remote ports in Alaska, and its 
boss managed to persuade McNamara that the company 
could straighten out logistics in Vietnam. Alaska Barge 
quickly began building docks, and it replaced the erratic 
service of Vietnamese coastal ships with a barge shuttle 
service to move supplies up and down the coast. “We 
couldn’t have gotten along without it,” recalled the com-
mander of the MSTS. Alaska Barge’s success left an im-
pression on military officials used to doing things in war 
zones the military way: perhaps there were other jobs in 
Vietnam that private companies could do better than 
uniformed troops.10
It was not the excess of cargo alone that caused the port 
logjam in Vietnam. Aside from fuel, every bit of cargo 
shipped to Vietnam, military or civilian, arrived in the 
holds of breakbulk ships. Unloading meant lifting indi-
vidual items out of the hold and placing them on the 
dock or, even worse, into a shallow- draft vessel that 
would ferry them to shore, where they would have to be 
unloaded a second time. Many ships made multiple 
stops, and if a ship had been stowed poorly in Oakland 
or Seattle, some cargo would have to be unloaded and 
then reloaded for delivery to the next port. Often, cargo 
could not be identified once it was finally on the dock, 
complicating efforts to get it to the troops who were sup-
238 • Chapter 9
posed to receive it. After surveying the situation, a mili-
tary study team recommended basic changes in shipping 
procedures in November 1965. Logistics officers in the 
United States should send full shiploads to individual 
Vietnamese ports, rather than having a ship make several 
port calls, so the vessel could return to America as quickly 
as possible. Vessels should be loaded for ease of dis -
charge. Cargo for different consignees in Vietnam should 
be kept separate as much as possible, to minimize sorting 
at the dock. The first recommendation on the commit -
tee’s list was most notable of all: all shipments should 
come in “unitized packaging.”11
To military logistics experts, “unitized packaging” 
meant above all the ubiquitous five- ton Conex boxes 
that were carried with other cargo in the holds of break-
bulk ships. Palletization, in which individual items were 
wrapped on a wooden pallet and moved on and off ships 
as a single piece, had come into commercial use in the 
early 1950s, and by late 1965 the Sharpe Army Depot, 
the main supply base in California, was promoting it for 
military cargo. McNamara, however, knew that the com-
mercial world had moved far beyond small containers 
and wooden pallets. Leading shipping executives were 
invited to Washington, where they were shown film clips 
of sailors lowering cargo nets by rope and asked for ad-
vice. When Malcom McLean saw the film, a colleague 
recalled, “he got obsessed with the idea of putting con-
tainerships into Vietnam. He was back and forth to 
Washington, talking to people, and they told him there 
isn’t anything you can do in Vietnam.”
12
McLean finally got the ear of Frank Besson, the four- 
star general who headed army supply operations. At 
Vietnam • 239
Christmas 1965, Besson agreed that McLean could take 
a look at the situation in Vietnam. McLean phoned his 
engineering chief, Ron Katims, and consulting engineer 
Robert Campbell, both just arrived in Europe to plan the 
start of Sea- Land’s European service, and told them to 
meet his Pan Am flight in Paris the next morning. A day 
later, with their wool suits and overcoats, the trio was in 
steamy Saigon. They visited Da Nang and Cam Ranh 
Bay, got rounds of military briefings, and crossed paths 
with a delegation from the International Longshore -
men’s Association, which had arrived in Saigon on De-
cember 16. McLean’s team concluded that containeriza-
tion would solve much of the logistical confusion in 
Vietnam. He received the prompt endorsement of ILA 
president Teddy Gleason—the same Teddy Gleason who 
had fended off containerization in New York for the bet-
ter part of a decade. On departing Vietnam in late Janu-
ary, Gleason urged the government to lease as many con-
tainerships as it could find.
13
The military command was of two minds when it 
came to such a radical change in procedures. On the one 
hand, political pressure to bring in private- sector exper-
tise was intense. At a top- level conference in Honolulu in 
January 1966, the Joint Chiefs announced a new policy 
“to contract for civilians to perform duties which they 
could accomplish, such as the operation of port facili -
ties.” On the other hand, no one in the military had ex-
perience with containerization. The MSTS had never 
leased a containership or run a supply exercise involving 
containers. The Defense Department’s initial request for 
proposals to run a “containership service” to Vietnam 
involved only 7- foot Conex boxes carried as breakbulk 
240 • Chapter 9
cargo, not the far larger aluminum containers that could 
be handled by high- speed cranes and lifted directly onto 
truck chassis for delivery. The numerous port construc-
tion projects under way by early 1966, including the 
deepwater complex at Cam Ranh Bay, the Newport de-
velopment in Saigon, and the new piers at Da Nang and 
other ports, all were proceeding as conventional break-
bulk facilities. Container shipping, no matter how im -
portant in the commercial world, was not something 
that the military knew how to do.14
Through the winter of 1966, McLean struggled to 
convince the Pentagon that containerization could solve 
its logistical problems in Vietnam. In April, he finally 
obtained a foothold. Equipment Rental Inc., a new divi-
sion of McLean Industries, was awarded an army con-
tract to run a trucking operation at the Saigon piers. The 
contract had nothing to do with containers, but McLean 
was so eager to show what his company could do that 
Equipment Rental began moving freight two months 
ahead of schedule. In May, Besson asked the MSTS to 
give Sea- Land a contract to run three containerships be-
tween Oakland and the Japanese island of Okinawa, a 
major staging point for Vietnam. Sea- Land was to deliver 
476 35- foot containers every 12 days. At the same time, 
with conventional carriers unable to supply additional 
vessels, the MSTS solicited bids for containerships to sail 
directly from the United States to Vietnam. Sea- Land 
would have to compete for the business—but as the larg-
est containership operator by far, the only one sailing 
across the Pacific, and the only one with a handy supply 
of vessels equipped with the shipboard cranes needed to 
unload in Vietnam, it had the edge. When several com-
Vietnam • 241
petitors sought to submit a joint proposal, the MSTS 
refused to accept their bid. Things finally seemed to be 
going McLean’s way.15
But Vietnam was still not ready for container ship -
ping. The First Logistical Command, the agency in charge 
of the military’s port, warehousing, and trucking opera-
tions in Vietnam, was notably unenthusiastic. The port 
delays facing military ships had eased during the first 
half of 1966, from an average of 6.9 days in February to 
5.3 in July, and port congestion problems had less ur -
gency for the forces on the ground. No cranes or storage 
areas for containers were available, and none were under 
construction. With Besson’s Washington- based Army 
Materiel Command pushing container shipping aggres-
sively, and with Sea- Land showing in Okinawa that 
 container service required only half as many ships and 
one- sixteenth as much labor as breakbulk service, West-
moreland ordered the First Log to reassess its opposi -
tion. In July 1966, that command finally conceded that 
a containership service was desirable, but no sooner than 
October 1967. Sea- Land won a contract to open a con-
tainership service to Subic Bay, the sprawling U.S. naval 
base in the Philippines, but the bidding for service to 
Vietnam was postponed.16
It took yet another logistical breakdown in Vietnam 
to put an end to bureaucratic resistance. The improve -
ments of the first half of 1966 were being reversed by 
August under the mounting flood of supplies and war 
materiel: shipments from California to Vietnam would 
be 55 percent higher in the year starting July 1, 1966, 
than they had been in the year just ended. Ships were 
once again arriving by surprise, tying up ports, while the 
242 • Chapter 9
lack of basic supplies was so severe that the air force had 
to airlift a half million tons of meat from Okinawa be-
cause there was none in- country. Nonmilitary cargoes, 
including U.S. aid, were taking two weeks or more to 
unload, and the backlog of military cargo was rising 
even as the army was grappling with such perplexing 
supply problems as a surplus of “ecclesiastical items, 
with greatly limited demand experience,” and evacuating 
nonessential candelabras and crucifixes. Unloading at 
Saigon was hampered by resistance from Vietnamese 
longshoremen, who feared that the U.S. military would 
take over the docks and eliminate civilian jobs. When 
McNamara visited Vietnam in October 1966, the secre-
tary of defense spent much of his time on port problems. 
“McNamara Acts to End Port Tie Up,” the military 
newspaper headlined.17
In that environment, the MSTS reopened the bidding 
for containership service to Vietnam on October 14. 
Three companies were interested, but Sea- Land upstaged 
the competition by offering to provide not only contain-
ers but chassis, trucks, and terminals. To the govern -
ment’s surprise, Sea- Land proposed a fixed price per ton 
rather than the customary markup over its costs. After 
much negotiation, Sea- Land was awarded a $70 million 
contract in March 1967 to provide seven ships. Three of 
its largest vessels were to start sailing between Oakland 
and Seattle and Cam Ranh Bay by August. Sea- Land 
would install shore- based cranes there to handle the traf-
fic. Three small vessels with shipboard cranes would 
cover routes between the West Coast and Da Nang start-
ing in June, four months earlier than the First Logistical 
Command had deemed possible. The seventh ship was to 
Vietnam • 243
serve as an interport shuttle within Vietnam. Sea- Land 
agreed to furnish refrigerated containers, to unload its 
own ships, and to deliver the containers with its own 
trucks and chassis to any point within thirty miles of its 
piers.
18
Almost overnight, Cam Ranh Bay was turned into a 
large containerport. One of the DeLong piers was rede-
signed to support massive container cranes, and South 
Korean welders worked in intense heat inside the pier to 
reinforce the wooden deck. Crane rails were installed on 
the deck, while Sea- Land assembled two cranes in the 
Philippines from a patchwork of parts. In June, two 
barges, loaded with the partially built cranes, trucks to 
haul containers, campers for workers to live in, and even 
a sewage disposal plant, were floated across the South 
China Sea from the Philippines to Cam Ranh Bay. Then 
the realities of construction in the middle of a war zone 
intervened. The Da Nang operation got under way on 
August 1, a few weeks late, as the first containership to 
serve Vietnam, the Bienville, arrived from Oakland and 
unloaded its 226 containers in fifteen hours. The con -
tainerport at Cam Ranh Bay, though, did not see its first 
ship until November 1967, three months behind sched-
ule. When it finally arrived, the Oakland, 685 feet long, 
delivered 609 35- foot containers—as much cargo as 
could be carried on ten average breakbulk ships hauling 
military freight to Vietnam.
19
Another huge containership brought 600 or so con -
tainers to Cam Ranh Bay every two weeks. One- fifth of 
them were typically refrigerated units filled with meat, 
produce, and even ice cream. The remainder held almost 
every type of military supply except ammunition, which 
244 • Chapter 9
was not approved for shipment by container. Sea- Land’s 
trucks carried about half the food to nearby bases, and 
the rest was transshipped to Saigon or other coastal 
ports on the rusty vessel Sea- Land used as a feeder ship. 
Sea- Land’s state- of- the- art computer system at Cam 
Ranh Bay used punch cards to keep track of every con-
tainer from loading in the United States to arrival in Viet-
nam to its return to America. Supplies flowed in, and the 
cargo backlog dissipated. “The port congestion problem 
was solved,” the army’s history of 1967 declared trium-
phantly. The seven Sea- Land containerships, MSTS com-
mander Lawson Ramage estimated, moved as much 
cargo as twenty conventional vessels, going far to allevi-
ate the chronic shortage of merchant shipping.
20
Just like commercial shippers, military shippers needed 
to learn how to use the container to best advantage. At 
first, they treated it simply like a big, empty box. Much 
of the initial load on Sea- Land’s Okinawa service con-
sisted of the smaller steel Conex containers. Four Conex 
boxes were loaded into each 35- foot Sea- Land container, 
meaning that a quarter of the weight inside the big con-
tainer was nothing more than the steel of the smaller 
boxes. Logistics officers were uncertain how to make ef-
ficient use of the 45,000- pound load limit of an unrefrig-
erated container while utilizing all of its 2,088 cubic feet, 
so containers were frequently shipped underweight or 
with only half of their volume utilized. On the runs to 
Okinawa and to Subic Bay in the Philippines, for which 
the government had guaranteed a minimum number of 
containers, “It has become common practice . . . to take 
cargo that should go break- bulk and stuff it into Sea- 
Land’s containers to fulfill the guaranteed minimums,” 
Vietnam • 245
an MSTS administrator complained. Military record 
keeping often was inadequate to take advantage of the 
container’s efficiencies: in early 1968, after MSTS started 
shipping from California to Hawaii in Matson’s contain-
ers, it found repeatedly that the containers listed on 
ships’ cargo manifests were not necessarily the ones ar-
riving in Honolulu.21
Such adjustments notwithstanding, in 1968, the first 
full year of container operations, one- fifth of all military 
cargo in the Pacific was shipped in containers. The con-
tainerized share of nonpetroleum cargo was probably 
closer to two- fifths. On- time performance was spotty—
the shipboard cranes on the vessels serving Da Nang 
were continual problems, and repair often required de-
laying the ship—but Sea- Land managed to deliver be-
tween 1,230 and 1,320 containers to Cam Ranh Bay 
every month in its first year of operation. By June 1968, 
the army’s supply operation in Da Nang was asking the 
MSTS for more container capacity. In October, Sea- Land 
added a fourth large C- 4 containership to its Vietnam 
fleet and expanded its delivery area to fourteen interior 
locations. With other ship lines clamoring to enter the 
market, the Joint Chiefs sought to double container ser-
vice to Vietnam at the end of 1968, only to run up against 
the fact that Sea- Land controlled the only deepwater 
container piers on the coast. Sea- Land itself offered to 
revise its contract and increase service. “Potential for 
multi million dollar cost reduction . . . is visualized,” re-
ported the army’s assistant chief of staff for logistics. 22 
Indeed, evidence of lower costs and reduced damage was 
already mounting impressively. McLean estimated in 
1967 that loading a containership, sailing it to Vietnam, 
246 • Chapter 9
and unloading it there cost about half as much per ton 
as carrying the same cargo in a Navy- owned merchant 
ship, not counting the reduction in loss and damage. 
Looking back from 1970, Besson calculated that the 
armed forces could have saved $882 million in shipping, 
inventory, port, and storage costs between 1965 and 
1968 if they had adopted containerization when the 
buildup began.23
The military, hesitant to adopt container technology, now 
became its greatest advocate, and containerization be -
came a tool for reform. MSTS chief Ramage warned in 
October 1968 that the potential of the container system 
could not be fully realized until supply agencies and mili-
tary traffic managers revamped their procedures. The 
army instructed its depots to stop combining shipments 
that would need to be sorted in Vietnam and to abide by 
the Three Cs: one container, one customer, one commod-
ity. In 1968, McNamara named Besson, containeriza -
tion’s most ardent military supporter, to head the Joint 
Logistics Review Board that would evaluate supply- 
system performance in Vietnam. Besson, with the support 
of McNamara’s successor, Melvin Laird, used the oppor-
tunity to push for a more centralized system of military 
logistics, run by the army and built around land- sea 
transportation of intermodal containers. The venerable 
Conex container, designed for the days when the cranes 
on oceangoing ships could lift only five tons, would be 
phased out. The army bought its first commercial- size 
containers, twenty feet long, able to hold six and a half 
times as much freight as Conex boxes, and fully compat-
ible with the newest containerships and cranes.
24
Vietnam • 247
Once the commitment to containerization was made, 
the transition was swift. Half of military cargo going to 
Europe was containerized by 1970. Military engineers 
drafted plans for portable terminals to unload containers 
in underdeveloped locations on short notice. The army 
and the navy tested containerization of ammunition by 
loading containers at factories and shipping them aboard 
a dedicated vessel to combat units in Vietnam; containers 
were a perfectly safe way to transport ammunition, the 
studies concluded, although artillery shells were so heavy 
that shipping them in containers longer than twenty feet 
left a lot of empty space. “Containerization cannot be 
considered just another means of transportation,” Bes -
son told Congress in 1970. “The full benefits of contain-
erization can only be derived from logistic systems de -
signed with full use of containers in mind.” It was a 
conclusion that shippers in the private sector were only 
beginning to reach.
25
Malcom McLean’s persistence in pushing containeriza-
tion was vital to the U.S. war effort in Vietnam. With -
out it, America’s ability to prosecute a large- scale war 
halfway around the world would have been severely 
limited. The U.S. military would have experienced ex-
treme difficulty feeding, housing, and supplying the 
540,000 soldiers, sailors, marines, and air force person-
nel who were in Vietnam by the start of 1969. Contin -
ual headlines about theft, supply shortages, and massive 
waste would have caused domestic support for the war 
to erode even faster than it did. Containerization en -
abled the United States to sustain a well- fed and well- 
equipped force through years of combat in places that 
248 • Chapter 9
would otherwise have been beyond the reach of U.S. 
military might.
Containerization was vital as well to the growth of 
Sea- Land Service. Defense Department contracts had 
long been life- or- death matters for U.S.- flag ship lines 
with international routes. Until 1966 and 1967, when 
military transportation agencies first put their shipping 
needs up for competitive bidding, the military’s freight 
on a given route had been divided up among all the U.S.- 
flag lines serving that route, guaranteeing every carrier a 
piece of the pie. The Defense Department’s involvement 
with container shipping had been minimal, and it had 
never tendered freight to Sea- Land, even on domestic 
routes to Puerto Rico and Alaska, because the military 
was not equipped to use 35- foot containers. Vietnam 
broke the barrier. From almost nothing in 1965, Sea- 
Land’s Defense Department revenues rose to a total of 
$450 million between 1967 and 1973. In the peak year, 
fiscal 1971, $102 million of Vietnam- related contracts 
accounted for 30 percent of the company’s sales.26
Like everything else Malcom McLean did, venturing 
into Vietnam entailed considerable risk in hopes of large 
reward. The cost and risk of reinforcing the pier at Cam 
Ranh Bay, assembling the cranes, floating equipment and 
vehicles across from the Philippines, and building the 
truck terminals were entirely Sea- Land’s. The U.S. gov-
ernment was liable only for damage to Sea- Land’s trucks 
and equipment caused by enemy fire. It did not furnish 
men or material to help Sea- Land get its operations up 
and running. In a place where replacement parts could 
not simply be ordered from a nearby distributor, the 
chance that something would go wrong, blowing bud -
Vietnam • 249
gets and cost calculations, was very high. McLean was 
running a commercial operation in a war zone, and bet-
ting that he could control costs well enough to make a 
profit from his fixed- price bid.
27
The gamble paid off hugely. In return for his willing-
ness to bear risks on the cost side, McLean negotiated 
contacts that assured Sea- Land’s revenue. The MSTS 
guaranteed a minimum number of containers on each 
trip to Okinawa and the Philippines. To Vietnam, the 
rate per container was fixed, but Sea- Land’s contract re-
quired the government to offer it “all of its containeriz-
able cargo” outbound from Seattle and Oakland, leading 
to extremely high utilization: in 1968, 99 percent of the 
container slots were filled.
No figures are available on profits from the Vietnam 
service, but high capacity utilization must have trans -
lated into robust profitability. Each round trip from the 
West Coast to Cam Ranh Bay brought Sea- Land more 
than $20,000 per day, and each smaller vessel sailing to 
Da Nang took in about $8,000 per day, at a time when 
MSTS was paying $5,000 per day to lease large break-
bulk ships. Sea- Land was also protected against the risk 
that its containers would vanish into the jungles of Viet-
nam. A central control office kept track of each con -
tainer, and containers had to be emptied and returned 
within specified time limits or the unit holding them had 
to pay extra charges.
28
The contracts also permitted Sea- Land to make some 
extra profit. The Philippines service was supposed to call 
at both Manila and Subic Bay, but after Sea- Land threat-
ened to charge $500 an hour for port delays in Manila, 
the air force decided it could pick up its spare parts just 
250 • Chapter 9
as easily at Subic Bay; the contract remained unaltered, 
and Sea- Land was able to save $6,800 per trip by skip-
ping the stop in Manila. Sea- Land collected additional 
revenue any time an army unit in the field restuffed a 
container with material to be “retrograded” to the United 
States, because its MSTS contracts were westbound only. 
These payments for eastbound freight were pure profit 
and were high enough that in March 1968 the U.S. com-
mand revoked permission to retrograde freight via con-
tainer because, it was explained delicately, Sea- Land’s 
charges were “not rate- favorable.”29
Malcom McLean was not one to pass up an opportunity 
for profit. Now, an obvious one awaited. He had six 
ships, three large and three small, sailing between the 
U.S. West Coast and Vietnam. Westbound, they were 
loaded nearly full with military freight. East- bound, they 
carried little but empty containers. The rates paid by the 
U.S. government for the westbound haul covered all 
costs for the entire voyage. If Sea- Land could find freight 
to carry from the Pacific back to the United States, the 
revenue would be almost entirely profit. Thinking the 
situation through, McLean had another of his brain -
storms: why not stop in Japan?
Japan was the world’s fastest- growing economy dur-
ing the 1960s: between 1960 and 1973, its industrial 
output quadrupled. Already the second- largest source of 
U.S. imports, by the late 1960s Japan was quickly mov-
ing up the ladder from apparel and transistor radios to 
stereo systems, cars, and industrial equipment. It took 
little imagination to envision the potential for container 
shipping. The Japanese government had used a typical 
Vietnam • 251
industrial policy exercise to endorse containerization in 
1966, when the Shipping and Shipbuilding Rationaliza-
tion Council urged the Ministry of Transport to elimi -
nate confusion and excessive competition in order to 
derive maximum national benefit from the new technol-
ogy. The council called for container service between 
Japan and the U.S. West Coast to begin in 1968, with 
services to the U.S. East Coast, Europe, and Australia to 
begin by 1970. It asked the government to build con -
tainer terminals initially in the Tokyo/Yokohama and 
Osaka/Kobe areas. The government, the council said, 
should require Japanese and foreign shipping lines to 
form consortia to operate the containerships and termi-
nals, but should structure that cooperation to avoid un-
dermining Japanese ship lines. If all went as planned, the 
council said, half of Japan’s exports would be container-
ized by 1971, traveling on 12 ships carrying 1,000 con-
tainers each.
30
The government acted with unusual speed. Delega -
tions visited Oakland and other U.S. ports to learn how 
a containerport should be run. New port legislation was 
approved in August 1967, and Japan’s first two container 
cranes began operation in Tokyo and Kobe by the end of 
the year. Matters on the land side were not quite so easy. 
Standard trucks in Japan hauled loads smaller than 11 
tons, and in any case highway regulations barred full- 
size containers, except on a handful of new toll roads. 
The Japanese National Railway was not equipped to 
carry containers longer than 20 feet. The type of inter -
modal transportation being practiced in North America 
and since 1966 in Europe, with containers transferred 
almost seamlessly from a ship to a truck or railcars to the 
252 • Chapter 9
recipient’s loading dock, would not be simple to replicate 
in Japan.31
The first to try was Matson Navigation. In February 
1966, Matson won U.S. government approval to operate 
an unsubsidized freight service between the West Coast, 
Hawaii, and the Far East. The company’s management 
had visions of fast ships racing across the Pacific with 
television sets and wristwatches, discharging cargo at 
Oakland directly to special trains that would carry it 
east. On the return trip, there might be military cargo for 
the U.S. bases in Japan and South Korea. The key as -
sumption was that Matson would have two or three 
years to capture the business of Japan’s leading export-
ers before other ship lines entered the market. Matson 
sent two of its C- 3 breakbulk ships to a Japanese ship-
yard to be converted into self- unloading ships able to 
carry 464 containers and, in recognition of Japan’s rap-
idly growing auto exports, 49 cars. It ordered two high- 
speed containerships in Germany for delivery in 1969. 
To encourage Japanese customers, it entered a joint ven-
ture with a Japanese ship line, Nippon Yusen Kaisha 
(N.Y.K. Line). In September 1967, before a single con-
tainer crane was operating in the country, Matson began 
service to Japan.
32
Competitors were not far behind. In January 1968, 
four Japanese ship lines signed leases for container berths 
in Oakland. In March 1968, the same month that army 
officers in Vietnam were ordered not to ship cargo back 
to the States via Sea- Land, Sea- Land announced that it 
would provide weekly sailings from Japan.
Like almost everything else connected with Malcom 
McLean, Sea- Land’s entry in Japan stemmed more from 
Vietnam • 253
instinct than from analysis. “We’ve got these empty ships 
coming back from Vietnam,” former Sea- Land executive 
Scott Morrison recalled. “So we have a meeting, and 
Malcom says, ‘Anybody know anybody at Mitsui?’ ” Mc-
Lean handed around the Japanese trading company’s an-
nual report and announced that he wanted to fly to 
Tokyo to meet its president. Two weeks later, a sizeable 
delegation from Mitsui was touring Sea- Land’s docks at 
Elizabeth. Malcom McLean wanted nothing to do with 
joint ventures, but he hired a Mitsui group company to 
build Sea- Land a terminal in Japan. Another Mitsui com-
pany agreed to be Sea- Land’s agent, and a third agreed 
to handle domestic trucking within Japan. With its ship 
operating costs fully covered by its military contracts for 
Vietnam, Sea- Land was guaranteed to make money no 
matter how little cargo it picked up in Japan.33
The first Japanese containership, owned by Matson 
partner N.Y.K. Line, completed its maiden voyage to 
America in September 1968. Six weeks later, having been 
duly admitted to the transpacific conference, Sea- Land 
began six sailings a month from Yokohama to the West 
Coast, its ships laden with televisions and stereos pro-
duced by Japanese factories. Other Japanese carriers 
entered as well. The Japan–West Coast route, which had 
no commercial container service at all before September 
1967, was suddenly crowded with ships needing to be 
filled. Seven different companies were competing for less 
than seven thousand tons of eastbound freight each 
month by the end of 1968, and more were about to  
join. The lack of business proved to be only temporary. 
The cargo would soon come, in a flood that no one 
imagined.34
CHAPTER 10
Ports in a Storm
The Coastwise Steamship Company had been created 
to serve the paper industry. Since the 1930s, its ships had 
picked up rolls of newsprint from Crown Zellerbach’s 
mills at Port Angeles and Camas, in Washington State, 
and hauled them down the coast to California. The busi-
ness was reliable—until the Southern Pacific and Union 
Pacific railroads went after the traffic. They exempted 
newsprint from their general rate increases in the 1950s, 
and then they began to lower their rates in order to cap-
ture the cargo. To compete, the ship line had to slash its 
tariff for newsprint from $32 to $18 per ton. By 1958, 
Coastwise Steamship Company was near insolvency, and 
the Pacific coastal trade in newsprint was dead.1
As with newsprint, so with cotton and oranges, chemi-
cals and lumber. American coastal shipping withered 
during the 1950s in the face of a competitive onslaught 
by trains and especially trucks. The number of cargo 
ships engaged in coastwise trade, aside from tankers, fell 
from 66 in 1950 to 35 in 1960, and the total tonnage of 
active coastal ships dropped by one- third. The water -
fronts that had once been vital to local economies fell 
into decay as the ships stopped coming. Docks were 
Ports in a Storm • 255
abandoned, warehouses bricked up. Over the thirteen 
years from 1945 to 1957, total investment on construc-
tion and modernization at all North American ports out-
side New York came to a meager $40 million a year.
2
Two events tied to containerization brusquely awak-
ened the somnolent port industry. In December 1955 
came the Port of New York Authority’s decision to turn 
450 acres of New Jersey salt marsh into a futuristic port 
for containerships, a scheme utterly beyond the capabil-
ity of any other port in the world. Less publicized, but 
even more ominous, were the changes in Malcom 
McLean’s container service. McLean had gone to great 
trouble to secure rights to serve ports from Boston to 
Galveston, and the fully containerized ships Pan- Atlantic 
introduced in 1957 were given expensive onboard cranes 
so they could call at almost any port. The plan was for 
Pan- Atlantic’s vessels, like traditional ships, to call at all 
the important towns along its routes. That plan was 
scrapped almost immediately, as Pan- Atlantic reshaped 
its service to focus on four ports—Newark, Jacksonville, 
Houston, and San Juan, Puerto Rico—and cut back or 
eliminated other stops.
These two unrelated developments—the rise of New 
York, the neglect of Tampa and Mobile—revealed the 
economics that would affect seaports as container ship-
ping grew. For ports, capturing container traffic was 
going to be expensive, requiring investments out of all 
proportion to what had come before. For ship lines, the 
days when vessels meandered along the coast, calling at 
every port in search of cargo, would soon be over. Every 
stop would mean tying up an expensive containership 
that could generate revenue and profit only when it was 
256 • Chapter 10
on the move. Only ports that could be relied on for large 
amounts of freight were worth a visit, and all others 
would be served by truck or barge.
By the late 1950s, the lesson for public officials al -
ready was clear. As container shipping expanded, mari-
time traffic would be drawn to a small number of very 
large ports. Many established centers of maritime com-
merce would no longer be needed, and ports would have 
to compete to be among the survivors. Most important, 
the scope of the investment that would be required—fill-
ing the sea to provide hundreds of acres of solid water -
front land, building enormous cranes and marshaling 
yards, creating off- dock infrastructure such as roads and 
bridges—was far beyond the ability of ship lines to fi -
nance. If they hoped to capture the jobs and tax revenues 
that would come with being a major transportation cen-
ter, government agencies would have to be far more 
closely involved in financing, building, and running ports 
than ever before.3
The new economic reality was grasped first by the ports 
along America’s West Coast. The Pacific ports were back-
waters during the 1950s. Domestic maritime commerce 
was fading, except where there was no alternative, such 
as Seattle’s trade with Alaska and runs between Califor-
nia ports and Hawaii. America’s international trade was 
overwhelmingly oriented toward Europe; excluding pe-
troleum and other tanker cargoes, barely 11 percent of 
imports and exports passed through Pacific ports in 
1955. Counting petroleum and chemicals, all the West 
Coast ports together handled less cargo in a year than 
New York City alone.4
Ports in a Storm • 257
Above all, the Pacific ports were victims of geography. 
Although the port cities themselves were large and grow-
ing quickly, their hinterlands were very thinly populated. 
All of California beyond Los Angeles and San Francisco 
Bay had barely six million inhabitants in 1960, and the 
eight Rocky Mountain states, stretching a thousand 
miles to the east, had a combined population smaller 
than New York City’s. The first important city inland of 
Seattle was Minneapolis, sixteen hundred miles away. 
Although the West’s industries were expanding rapidly, 
only Los Angeles–Long Beach had a manufacturing base 
that could rival the factory centers of the East and Mid-
west. Whereas Baltimore and Philadelphia could handle 
the foreign- trade needs of Pittsburgh and Chicago, the 
West Coast ports had no similar domestic markets, and 
potential trading partners across the Pacific, such as 
Korea, China, and the nations of Indochina, were cut 
off by war or politics. With cargo flows flat, except for 
oil, the ports had no avenue for growth. Seattle’s docks 
saw 10 percent less cargo in 1960 than in 1950. Ta -
coma, mainly a lumber port a few miles south on Puget 
Sound, had lost one- third of its traffic over the same 
decade as the timber companies shifted their business to 
the rails. Tonnage in Portland fell by 17 percent. The 
only West Coast port that grew during the 1950s was 
Los Angeles, which invested in new wharves and ware-
houses in hopes of challenging the regional dominance 
of San Francisco.
5
Containerization offered a chance to escape these geo-
graphic constraints. Instructed by the efforts of Matson, 
whose studies of container service to Hawaii envisioned 
the Pacific ports becoming hubs for truck pickups and 
258 • Chapter 10
deliveries in Denver and Salt Lake City, civic leaders  
up and down the West Coast looked afresh at their dete-
riorating waterfronts. The action began in San Fran -
cisco, where the state of California oversaw ninety- six 
outmoded piers. Many were narrow wooden docks 
 unchanged since the 1920s, and even those that were 
structurally sound were not designed for large trucks. 
Consultants recommended a new “superterminal” big 
enough to handle eight oceangoing ships, to be located 
at Army Street south of downtown. In 1958, California 
voters approved $50 million of bonds for the port, a 
substantial amount for the time.6
Seattle soon followed San Francisco’s lead and hired a 
consultant to help save its port. All of Seattle’s twenty- 
one piers predated the end of World War II, and most had 
been built for sailing ships shortly after 1900. By the late 
1950s, only six piers were in part- time use for general 
cargo, and the port’s tax- advantaged foreign trade zone 
was so quiet that the Seattle Port Commission, a county 
agency, considered closing it. A local television documen-
tary about the sorry state of the port turned the political 
situation around in 1959. Business leaders formed a port 
committee, and in July 1960 the Port Commission un -
veiled a $32 million construction plan that included two 
container terminals. The port was suddenly the center of 
attention: in November 1960, no fewer than seventeen 
candidates stood for election to the Port Commission. 
Voters approved a $10 million bond issue for the first 
stage of construction.7
Los Angeles, where the new Long Beach and Harbor 
freeways had been designed to move trucks out of the 
port, kept pace. City officials tried aggressively to per -
Ports in a Storm • 259
suade voters of the port’s economic importance, and they 
were rewarded with authority to issue revenue bonds—
bonds that would be serviced with ship lines’ lease pay-
ments—in a 1959 referendum. By 1960, Matson’s two- 
year- old container service to Hawaii, using facilities 
Matson had improved at its own expense, moved seven 
thousand containers across the docks. It was a tiny op-
eration compared with Sea- Land’s base at Newark, but 
it was enough to make Los Angeles the largest contain-
erport on the West Coast. The municipal port depart -
ment, with the strong backing of city hall, promptly em-
barked on a five- year, $37 million program to build 
wharves and cranes for containerships.8
The most dramatic change, though, occurred in Oak-
land, on the east side of San Francisco Bay. Through the 
start of the 1960s, Oakland was a sleepy agricultural 
port one- third the size of Long Beach, Seattle, or Port -
land, and far smaller than San Francisco. Its waterfront 
was lined with industries—a dog food plant, a dry ice 
plant, a brake shoe factory—that had long since ceased 
to be important port users. Oakland had almost no in-
coming traffic; typically, European ships would arrive at 
San Francisco, unload, and then sail across to Oakland 
to take on canned fruit, almonds, and walnuts for the 
voyage home. The Oakland Port Commission, a city 
agency, had issued its first revenue bonds in 1957 to re-
pair a few old docks, but it had no grander plans. Then 
came an unexpected development. Officials in San Fran-
cisco, where Matson had based its container service to 
Hawaii, ignored Matson’s request for a separate con -
tainer terminal, because the city’s port director thought 
container shipping a passing fad. When Matson installed 
260 • Chapter 10
the world’s first land- based container crane in 1959, it 
was built not in San Francisco, the West’s greatest mari-
time center, but in Alameda, a small city within plain 
view of the Oakland docks.9
Matson’s operation focused the attention of Oakland 
port officials on container shipping. In early 1961, they 
learned of American- Hawaiian Steamship’s application 
for government subsidies to build a fleet of large contain-
erships. The vessels would run through the Panama 
Canal, mainly carrying fruit and vegetables from Cali -
fornia canneries to East Coast markets. This was a natu-
ral cargo for Oakland to capture. Port director Dudley 
Frost and chief engineer Ben Nutter prepared two bind-
ers of facts and figures, added leather covers stamped 
“American- Hawaiian Steamship Company,” and flew 
east in April 1961. Meetings with government and indus-
try officials in Washington changed their plans. “Some-
body said, ‘Oh, forget those guys. They’re no good. Go 
and see Sea- Land,’ ” Nutter recalled. “I said, ‘Sea who?’ ” 
The cover on one of the binders was quickly replaced by 
one stamped “Sea- Land,” and Frost and Nutter made 
their way to Port Newark. A Sea- Land executive stopped 
their presentation to inform them that it had already 
decided to run containerships from Newark to Califor -
nia. If they could offer a suitable site at a reasonable 
price, Sea- Land would establish its northern terminus at 
Oakland.
10
Oakland had never hosted a containership, but it im-
mediately began to promote itself as a future container-
port. Nutter dreamed up a lease very different from the 
norm of so many cents per ton: Sea- Land would pay a 
minimum fee high enough to cover the cost of building 
Ports in a Storm • 261
its terminal and would pay more as its tonnage rose, but 
beyond a certain point there would be no additional 
charge. That “mini- max” provision gave Sea- Land an 
incentive to pump cargo through Oakland, because once 
its tonnage exceeded the upper limit, its average port cost 
per ton would plummet. Oakland spent $600,000 to up-
grade two berths, and the federal government agreed to 
deepen the harbor from 30 to 35 feet to permit larger 
containerships in the future. In September 1962, Sea- 
Land’s Elizabethport, the largest freighter in the world, 
steamed through the Panama Canal to call at Long Beach 
and Oakland.11
The West Coast ports already had more than doubled 
their annual investment over the span of two years, and 
the competitive battle had barely begun. Oakland, with 
two railroad yards right next to the port, appeared to 
have the edge. Los Angeles countered with another bond 
issue in 1962, this time for $14 million. Then the adja-
cent Port of Long Beach reemerged. Long Beach had 
struggled through the 1950s after the pumping of oil 
from beneath the harbor caused the harbor floor to sub-
side and docks to collapse. When the mess was finally 
cleaned up, the city- owned port found itself with a deeper 
harbor than Los Angeles. It snagged Sea- Land’s southern 
California terminus in 1962 and dedicated its oil reve -
nues to constructing a 310- acre landfill. The twin ports 
were soon waging a rate war that left Los Angeles, which 
had no oil and needed to turn a profit, at a disadvantage. 
Los Angeles and San Francisco asked the Federal Mari-
time Commission, the regulator, to block Sea- Land’s 
deals at Long Beach and Oakland on the ground that 
they involved unfair subsidies, to no avail. Up the coast, 
262 • Chapter 10
Seattle, where two container terminals were under con-
struction, announced a $30 million program to build 
more in August 1962, even though the seasonal Alaska 
Steamship operation was the only container business in 
the port. The ports were suddenly full of activity. The 
flow of nonmilitary cargo, flat for a decade, rose by one- 
third between 1962 and 1965.
12
Then Oakland raised the bar. The port’s ambitions 
centered on an area known as the Outer Harbor, bisected 
by an embankment that had once carried passenger 
trains to their terminus at a ferry landing. The Port Com-
mission was out of money after expanding the Oakland 
airport, but the Bay Area Rapid Transit District, which 
began designing its regional rail system in 1963, came to 
its rescue. In return for permission to tunnel beneath port 
property, the rail agency agreed to clear abandoned 
buildings along the embankment, construct a 9,100- foot 
dike, and fill the enclosed area with dirt excavated in 
tunnel construction. Oakland designed a vast terminal 
for the 140- acre site, with 12 berths, wharves 78 feet 
wide—wide enough to erect cranes that would straddle 
the dockside railroad tracks—and the ability to accom-
modate ships of almost any length. The outermost dock 
was barely a mile from 60- foot water depth in San Fran-
cisco Bay, assuring that the port would remain accessible 
as ships became larger.
Oakland delegations visited Japan, in 1963, and Eu-
rope, in 1964, and learned that several ship lines were 
interested in containerization. None of them was pre -
pared to sign a contract that would allow the port to sell 
revenue bonds, but a timely $10 million grant from the 
federal Economic Development Administration, in -
Ports in a Storm • 263
tended to generate jobs in the depressed city, supplied 
construction funds. A new terminal was rushed into con-
struction, without a tenant, before new environmental 
regulations took effect. With that project under way, Sea- 
Land decided in 1965 that it needed more space, and 
signed a contract for a twenty- six- acre terminal with two 
big shoreside cranes. A few months later, Matson, hith-
erto a purely domestic company, announced that Oak -
land’s new landfill would be its base for an unsubsidized 
service carrying containers between the Pacific Coast 
and Asia.13
Behind this frenzied expansion of long- neglected ports 
was the emergence of an entirely new line of thought 
about economic growth. Manufacturing was almost uni-
versally regarded as the bedrock of a healthy local econ-
omy in the 1960s, and much of the value of a port, aside 
from jobs on the docks, was that transportation- conscious 
manufacturers would locate nearby. As early as 1966, 
though, public officials in Seattle were sensing that their 
remote city, with little industry, might be able to develop 
a new economy based on distribution rather than on fac-
tories. The lack of population close at hand would be no 
obstacle; Seattle could become not merely a local port for 
western Washington but the center of a distribution net-
work stretching from Asia to the U.S. Midwest. “Com-
modity distribution has grown out of the dependent sec-
tor to link production and consumption,” port planner 
Ting- Li Cho wrote presciently. “It has become an inde-
pendent sector that, in return, determines the economy 
of production and consumption.” Much the same mes -
sage, with opposite implications for the local economy, 
was transmitted that same year to San Francisco officials 
264 • Chapter 10
by consulting firm Arthur D. Little. A great proportion of 
the city’s wholesaling, trucking, and warehousing busi-
ness would soon relocate to be near the emerging port 
facilities on the eastern side of San Francisco Bay, Little 
warned, because it no longer needed to be close to the 
other business activities in San Francisco.14
Fortified by increasing confidence in their economic 
prospects, Seattle, Oakland, Los Angeles, and Long 
Beach were in a constant state of construction. Sea- Land 
opened container service from Seattle to Alaska in 1964, 
a few days before the devastating Alaska earthquake cre-
ated huge demand for construction supplies and relief 
shipments. The U.S. buildup in Vietnam sent a flood of 
aid cargoes through Los Angeles and Long Beach. Oak-
land’s nonmilitary container shipments, just 365,085 
tons in 1965, quadrupled to 1.5 million tons in 1968 and 
doubled again to 3 million tons in 1969, as Japanese and 
European ship lines began pushing containers through 
the port. By now, nearly 60 percent of Oakland’s cargo 
was moving in containers. Los Angeles attracted four 
Japanese lines to a new terminal. Long Beach, anticipat-
ing that the shallower Los Angeles harbor would soon 
force ship lines to look elsewhere, began building space 
to handle ten ships at a time at three new terminals, in-
cluding a hundred- acre site for Sea- Land alone. Seattle 
began no fewer than three new terminals with no tenants 
in place, driven by a new imperative: if the supply of 
terminal space was not adequate to meet the demand for 
container shipping, the ships might go somewhere else.
15
Two traditional maritime centers stood aside from the 
frenzy. Portland, which handled nearly as much cargo as 
Seattle during the 1950s, could not muster the money or 
Ports in a Storm • 265
resources to build a containerport. The consequences 
were severe. Seattle’s foreign trade more than doubled 
between 1963 and 1972, but Portland’s barely grew. 
Once Japanese containerships began to call at Seattle, in 
1970, Portland found itself receiving Japanese goods by 
truck from Seattle rather than by ship from Yokohama. 
San Francisco faced more fundamental problems, be -
cause the city’s location, on a congested peninsula with 
direct rail access only to the south, was ill- suited to han-
dling freight to and from points east. City officials man-
aged to get dredging under way in 1968 after wresting 
control of their port away from the state, but actual con-
struction of container piers was delayed so long that 
even American President Lines, whose predecessor com-
panies had made their home in the city for more than a 
century, finally decamped for Oakland. The city’s plans 
kept changing, even as Seattle, Oakland, Los Angeles, 
and Long Beach opened one huge purpose- built con-
tainer terminal after another. In 1969, a Swedish ship 
line’s massive neon sign, a fixture of the San Francisco 
waterfront for decades, was moved across to the Oak -
land side of the bay, the glowing words “JOHNSON 
LINE” offering San Franciscans a nightly reminder that 
their city’s time as a major port was over.
16
The explosion of port construction on the Pacific Coast, 
starting in the 1950s, had no counterpart on the other 
side of the country. After Grace Line abandoned its ill- 
fated container service to Venezuela, Sea- Land was left 
as the only company using dedicated ships to move con-
tainers in the East. The many other lines that advertised 
container service handled boxes along with mixed freight 
266 • Chapter 10
and did not need special cranes or storage yards. More 
important, the extraordinary enthusiasm for container -
ization shown by Pacific Coast ports was little in evi -
dence on the Atlantic, except at Sea- Land’s home port in 
New Jersey. The West Coast ports that embraced con -
tainerization, save for Los Angeles, were withering in the 
late 1950s, and they saw salvation in the new technology. 
The ports on the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico had a 
steadier flow of cargo: as late as 1966, nine of the ten 
largest maritime routes for U.S. international trade 
passed through ports on the East Coast or the Gulf, and 
only one touched the West Coast. The eastern ports had 
less to gain from containerization, and, outside of New 
York, their eagerness to invest millions of dollars of pub-
lic money was correspondingly less acute.
17
The Port of New York Authority docks in Newark 
and Elizabeth were expanding without cease as con -
tainer shipping became an international business. By 
1965, a half dozen ship lines announced plans to launch 
container services from New Jersey docks to Europe in 
1966, and dozens of new ships were on order. The em-
brace of containerization was not repeated up and down 
the coast. The obstacles were the same almost every -
where: labor and money.
On the labor front, the New York Shipping Associa-
tion and the ILA had negotiated smaller gang sizes and 
a guaranteed annual income for displaced longshoremen 
in 1964, but union locals at other ports, save Philadel-
phia, had not. Unlike New York, where the efforts of the 
Waterfront Commission had eliminated casual dock -
workers in the 1950s, most other East and Gulf Coast 
ports had large numbers of part- time longshoremen well 
Ports in a Storm • 267
into the 1970s. Boston longshoremen worked an average 
of one and a half days per week, New Orleans longshore-
men two days. If containers were allowed, these part- 
time jobs were likely to vanish as the industry shifted to 
a permanent, full- time workforce. The ILA had seen how 
container shipping had decimated its membership rolls 
in New York, and it was loath to tolerate it in other ports 
until income guarantees were in place.
18
Interunion disputes were a problem as well. In Boston, 
the Massachusetts Port Authority spent $1.1 million to 
build a container crane in 1966 so that Sea- Land ships 
could call on their way between New York and Europe, 
but the terminal was kept closed first by a dispute be -
tween the ILA and port employers and then by a dispute 
between the ILA and the Teamsters union. Sea- Land and 
its competitors soon learned that they could operate 
more profitably by trucking Europe- bound containers to 
New York and having their ships bypass Boston, and 
port traffic never recovered. In New York and other 
ports, the Teamsters objected to contracts that guaran -
teed ILA members the right to consolidate partial loads 
into containers at inland warehouses. The ILA viewed 
these contracts as essential to preserving its members’ 
jobs as traditional maritime functions moved away from 
the waterfront, but the Teamsters viewed them as in -
fringements on their own jurisdiction over the ware -
house industry. Contests over which union’s members 
would do the work persisted until 1970.19
Aside from Baltimore, most ports found the cost of 
building dedicated container facilities so daunting that 
they postponed decisions. The city of Philadelphia, short 
of funds, did nothing toward containerization until wor-
268 • Chapter 10
ried business leaders pushed for the creation of a port 
corporation with authority to issue bonds, in 1965. Only 
after a study predicted that Philadelphia would soon be 
losing a million tons of freight per year did the new cor-
poration reluctantly invest in a container terminal, which 
opened in 1970. Miami built ramps for roll on–roll off 
ships but no specialized wharves for containerships. Gulf 
Coast ports such as Mobile decided not to invest in con-
tainerization because many of the Caribbean islands to 
which they exported were too small to require large con-
tainers. New Orleans, long the largest Gulf port, handled 
containers over the same wharves used for other types of 
cargo; its first purpose- built container terminal, located 
on a canal that subsequently proved too shallow, did  
not open for business until 1971. Houston, Sea- Land’s 
original western terminus, invested sooner, and it firmly 
established itself as the premier containerport on the 
Gulf.20
The net result of these decisions was that a single port, 
the Port of New York Authority’s complex at Newark 
and Elizabeth, dominated container shipping in the East. 
In 1970, only one other harbor between Maine and 
Texas, the Hampton Roads of Virginia, could boast even 
one- ninth the container capacity of the wharves on New 
York harbor. The emerging economics of container ship-
ping meant that the laggards faced potentially serious 
consequences. The newly built containerships coming on 
the scene in the late 1960s carried far more cargo than 
the vessels they supplanted; even if the total amount of 
cargo grew, fewer voyages would be required. Shipown-
ers wanted to keep their ships under way to recover the 
high construction cost, so they preferred that each voy-
Ports in a Storm • 269
age involve only one or two stops on either side of the 
ocean rather than four or five. Secondary ports would 
not see transatlantic ships but would get only feeder ser-
vices to bigger ports. Once a port had slipped from the 
first rank, it would have a hard time climbing back: a less 
active port would have to spread the cost of building a 
capital- intensive container terminal across fewer ships, 
and its higher costs per ship would in turn drive away 
business. Ports that came late to the container game ei-
ther would have to take huge risks in hopes of attracting 
tenants or would need to find a large ship line willing to 
help bear the costs of establishing a major new port of 
call.
21
Some late starters did succeed in turning themselves 
into major containerports with relentless investment. 
The first containers passed through Charleston, South 
Carolina, in 1965, but the port had only one berth and 
no specialized crane to handle containers. Then, in the 
late 1960s, Sea- Land decided to expand its very modest 
Charleston operation. The state- owned port began an 
ambitious development program, growing from an ini -
tial fifteen- acre container terminal into three terminals 
covering nearly three hundred acres by the early 1980s. 
Charleston, with almost no container traffic in 1970, 
ranked eighth among continental U.S. ports by 1973 and 
climbed to fourth by 2000. The nearby Port of Savannah, 
Georgia, another late starter, followed a similar trajec -
tory after belatedly installing its first container crane in 
1970. But as container shipping made the transition 
from the emerging technology of the early 1960s to the 
booming business of the early 1970s, the opportunity for 
ports to establish themselves as major maritime centers 
270 • Chapter 10
was diminishing rapidly. “The maintenance of a major 
port in every major coastal city is no longer justified,” a 
government report declared in the early 1970s. Such 
long- standing ports as Boston and San Francisco, Gulf-
port, Mississippi, and Richmond, California, would have 
to find other roles in the container age.22
The first decade of container shipping was an American 
affair. Ports, railroads, governments, and trade unions 
around the world spent those years studying the ways 
that containerization had shaken freight transportation 
in the United States. They knew that the container had 
killed off thousands of jobs on the docks, rendered entire 
ports obsolete, and fundamentally altered decisions 
about business location. Even so, the speed with which 
the container conquered global trade routes took almost 
everyone by surprise. Some of the world’s great port cit-
ies soon saw their ports all but disappear, while insignifi-
cant towns on little- known harbors found themselves 
among the great centers of maritime commerce.23
Nowhere was the transformation more tumultuous 
than in Britain. London and Liverpool were by far Brit-
ain’s biggest ports in the early 1960s, but their business 
was remarkably close to home. Exporters and importers 
tended to use the nearest port in order to minimize truck-
ing costs. About 40 percent of Britain’s exports in 1964 
originated within twenty- five miles of their port of ex -
port, and two- thirds of all imports traveled fewer than 
twenty- five miles from the port of discharge. London, a 
major industrial center in its own right, and Liverpool, 
serving the industrial heartland in the English Midlands, 
Ports in a Storm • 271
each handled one- fourth of British trade, with dozens of 
other ports claiming small shares.24
Both the London and the Liverpool docks were run by 
local government agencies, which since the 1940s had 
walked a tightrope between improving operations and 
antagonizing the powerful Transport and General Work-
ers Union; as one careful student aptly described the situ-
ation, the docks had been modernized in “a leisurely 
manner.” Dozens of small stevedoring companies com -
peted to load or unload each vessel, and the stevedores 
in turn hired longshoremen by the day. These transitory 
arrangements involving lightly capitalized companies 
provided no incentive to make long- term investments in 
automation. Although productivity gains had been slug-
gish since the mid- 1950s, pay gains had been robust. The 
average full- time docker earned about 30 percent more 
than the average male worker in Britain in the mid- 
1960s, compared with a gap of about 18 percent a de-
cade earlier.
25
Numerous government commissions had studied 
ways to make the ports more efficient. An inquiry in 
1966 had called for a reduction in the number of steve-
dore companies, in the expectation that the survivors 
would be larger, more professional, and better able to 
finance equipment for efficient cargo handling. In return, 
the government promised that automation would not 
lead to redundancies among dockers. Given time, per -
haps a deal could have been struck: on both coasts of the 
United States, the union agreements that opened the way 
for containerization had taken half a decade to arrange. 
No time was available in Britain, because technological 
272 • Chapter 10
change was forcing its way onto the docks. In March 
1966, United States Lines carried the first large contain-
ers, along with other freight, on a voyage from New York 
to London. The following month, Sea- Land’s Fairland 
steamed across the North Atlantic to Rotterdam, Bre -
men, and the Scottish port of Grangemouth, carrying 
only containers. With barely a year’s notice, Rotterdam 
and Bremen had lengthened docks, deepened channels, 
and begun installing container cranes. London had not—
and Fairland did not bother to call.26
London’s formidable docks, it was obvious, were not 
well suited for container shipping. The docks were 
grouped in sheltered enclosures off the Thames that were 
difficult even for conventional ships to navigate; large 
vessels had to unload into lighters nearer the mouth of 
the river. Labor issues aside, transferring cargo contain-
ers from oceangoing ships to lighters made no economic 
sense, and the prospect of hundreds of lorries hauling 
40- foot loads through the narrow streets of East London 
was a nightmare. Liverpool’s aging docks had similarly 
few attractions for container operators. The British 
Transport Docks Board, the government’s oversight 
agency, turned to consultants McKinsey & Company for 
advice. McKinsey predicted that container shipping 
would quickly consolidate around a few companies 
using gigantic ships carrying standardized containers. 
Ports, it said, would need to be very large to gain econo-
mies of scale in transferring containers between ships, 
trains, and trucks at high speed. Containerization could 
cut Britain’s ocean freight bill in half, McKinsey found—
but only if a single port were to handle all cargo to and 
from North America and then use unit trains to link the 
Ports in a Storm • 273
port to other parts of the United Kingdom. A simultane-
ous study by consultant Arthur D. Little predicted that 
in 1970, ships would carry the equivalent of 1,800 20- 
foot containers each week from America to Britain, and 
1,580 from Britain to America. Every aspect of these 
findings represented a threat to the power of the Trans-
port and General Workers Union: there would be fewer 
ships, fewer ports, and fewer workers at each port. An 
important part of traditional dock work, the loading and 
unloading of cargo, would move to warehouses miles 
inland, where dockers surely would not be employed.27
The British Transport Docks Board and local port 
agencies agreed on major investments that would total 
£200 million (roughly US$4 billion in 2015 dollars) be-
tween 1965 and 1969. The largest was the Port of Lon-
don Authority’s £30 million container complex at Til-
bury, a longtime port twenty miles down the Thames. 
Away from the traffic congestion of central London, and 
with populous southeast England at its doorstep, Tilbury 
had the potential to become Europe’s premier container-
port, or so the government hoped. There were to be five 
deepwater berths for containerships, each with twenty 
acres of land to store containers. Another containerport 
was built at Southampton, southwest of London, and the 
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board began a container 
terminal at Seaforth, north of Liverpool close to the deep 
water of the Irish Sea.
28
Tilbury’s opening in 1967 was accompanied by a “vol-
untary” severance scheme for dockworkers, funded by 
charges on cargo at major ports. The union soon accused 
employers of abusing the rules to get rid of workers, and 
it objected to the new government policy encouraging 
274 • Chapter 10
permanent employment rather than daily hiring on the 
docks. Reaching back to a tactic tried by the Interna -
tional Longshoremen’s Association in New York a de -
cade earlier, the union imposed a ban on containers at 
Tilbury from January 1968.29
The Transport and General Workers Union was pow-
erful, but not omnipotent. It had never bothered to sign 
up members at the tiny Port of Felixstowe, located on a 
North Sea estuary ninety miles northeast of London. Fe-
lixstowe, one of the hundreds of towns on Britain’s 
coasts, had two docks owned by the Felixstowe Railway 
and Dock Company, a private company controlled by an 
importer of grain and palm oil. The docks had been de-
stroyed in the storms of 1953, and by 1959 the only 
activity involved ninety permanent workers who un -
loaded tropical commodities into a few storage tanks 
and warehouses. Felixstowe had no general- cargo busi-
ness to protect, no militant unions, and, because it had 
never employed casual dock labor, no requirement for 
ship lines to contribute to the national dockworker sev-
erance scheme.
In 1966, while the British government was trying to 
convince container ship lines to call at Tilbury, Felixs -
towe’s owners had had the foresight to strike a private 
deal with Sea- Land Service. They spent £3.5 million 
pounds, less than one- eighth of the government’s outlay 
at Tilbury, to reinforce a wharf and install a container 
crane. Sea- Land opened service in July 1967 with a small 
ship shuttling containers back and forth to Rotterdam, 
and soon added ships directly from the United States. In 
1968, with Tilbury closed by the strike, the hitherto ob-
scure Port of Felixstowe became Britain’s largest con -
Ports in a Storm • 275
tainer terminal. United States Lines finally was able to 
use Tilbury after reaching a union agreement, but the 
port remained closed to most other container carriers, 
including British lines. By 1969, Felixstowe, with two or 
three North Atlantic sailings each week and several 
feeder services running across the North Sea to Rotter -
dam, handled 1.9 million tons of general cargo, every bit 
of it in containers.
30
Tilbury’s prolonged closure hit hard at the two con -
sortia of British carriers that had planned to launch con-
tainer services there, one across the North Atlantic and 
the other to Australia. They struck back in the traditional 
way: by trying to stifle their competitors. Sea- Land’s re-
quest to join the conferences that set rates between the 
United States and Britain was rejected until the company 
filed an antitrust suit in British courts. When a small U.S. 
company, Container Marine Lines, offered Scottish dis-
tillers a through rate covering shipments between their 
plants and U.S. ports, including land transportation from 
Scotland to Felixstowe, the conference objected that a 
through rate would lead to “regulatory disintegration.” 
Only the threat that the U.S. Federal Maritime Commis-
sion would curb the conference’s right to set rates forced 
it to accept more competition.
31
Felixstowe’s fortune came directly at London’s ex -
pense. London’s port had been busy through the mid- 
1960s. The shift to container shipping boosted average 
tonnage per man- hour 66 percent in just four years. The 
abrupt fall in costs at other ports drove the London 
docks to collapse. As Tilbury opened, the famous East 
India Dock closed without warning in 1967. As Felixs-
towe burgeoned, the St. Katherine Docks, adjoining the 
276 • Chapter 10
Tower of London, were shut in 1968. The nearby Lon-
don Docks followed immediately, and the Surrey Docks, 
across the river, closed in 1970. Of the 144 wharves that 
had operated in London at the start of 1967, 70 closed 
by the end of 1971, and almost all of the rest followed 
soon after. The number of dockworkers fell from 24,000 
to 16,000 in less than five years. Factories and ware -
houses, with no further need to be near the Thames, 
began to flee, taking their import- and- export business 
elsewhere, and the waterfront communities tied to the 
port began to disintegrate.32
The Transport and General Workers Union finally 
lifted its ban on handling containers at Tilbury after 
twenty- seven months, in April 1970. No sooner did the 
port reopen than it shut again, as the union waged a 
three- week nationwide dock strike to protest the steve-
dores’ preference for employing permanent, skilled 
workers to run their expensive equipment rather than 
hiring day labor. Nationally, dockers won a 7 percent 
pay raise, but a special agreement in London allowed 
containerization in return for double pay. Tilbury was 
able to open for container shipping at long last. But the 
delay took a toll. By the time it reopened, greater London 
had lost its place as the maritime center of Europe.33
The new center was Rotterdam, in the Netherlands. A 
port since the 1400s, Rotterdam had been demolished by 
German bombing in 1940. Rotterdam had long special-
ized in transshipment, and in prewar days bulk cargoes, 
such as grains and ores, were often moved directly from 
oceangoing ships to river barges without ever touching 
land. General cargo, however, was usually unloaded on 
center- city quays that had been designed for sailing ships 
Ports in a Storm • 277
centuries before. The ruins provided Dutch planners a 
clean canvas on which to build a modern port starting in 
the 1950s along the river Maas, on deeper water stretch-
ing toward the sea. Road, rail, and barge connections to 
Germany helped Rotterdam prosper as the two countries 
joined in the European Common Market. By 1962, its 
vast imports pushed Rotterdam ahead of New York as 
the world’s largest port by tonnage. Rotterdam set aside 
land for containers early on, and Dutch longshoremen, 
unlike their British counterparts, posed no objections 
when containerships began calling in 1966. During two 
and a half years of union- induced delay in Britain, Rot-
terdam spent $60 million to build the European Con -
tainer Terminus, with ten berths and room for more. 
Traffic that had once fed through London to other Brit-
ish ports was now transshipped at Rotterdam, which 
was on its way to becoming the largest container center 
in the world.
34
In Liverpool, meanwhile, the Mersey Docks and Har-
bour Board had become a financial disaster, its condition 
worsened by the diversion of cargo to the containerports. 
Parliament was forced to approve an emergency bailout 
in 1971. With Felixstowe now seen as a model, the na-
tional government took over the city’s docks. An infu -
sion of government loans and grants paid off redundant 
dockers and financed completion of the new pier com-
plex at Seaforth, including three terminals for containers. 
As the Royal Seaforth Docks opened in 1972, ten of Liv-
erpool’s historic piers, some of them two centuries old, 
were abandoned for good. The great maritime center of 
the British Empire, the cosmopolitan city whose cotton 
trade fueled the Industrial Revolution and whose Cu -
278 • Chapter 10
nard and White Star steamers dominated the North At-
lantic, fell into an economic stupor that would last for 
three decades.
The container contributed to a fundamental shift in 
the geography of British ports. In the precontainer era, 
London and Liverpool had dominated Britain’s interna-
tional trade, their docks and warehouses filled with 
goods headed to or from factories located nearby. The 
two ports each loaded one- quarter of Britain’s exports, 
with no other port handling more than 5 percent. The 
container stripped Liverpool of its competitive advan -
tages. Its costs per ton of cargo were too high, and it was 
on the wrong side of an island that was reorienting its 
trade toward continental Europe. In 1970, only 8 per -
cent of Britain’s rapidly growing container traffic moved 
through Liverpool, and the port’s share of all British 
maritime trade in manufactured goods was falling to -
ward 10 percent. Within five years, the exodus of port- 
related manufacturing would leave the city’s economy 
devastated.35
Britain’s accession to the European Economic Com -
munity in 1973 linked it more closely to Europe, favor-
ing London and other southern ports over northern and 
western ports such as Liverpool and Glasgow. Even so, 
London continued to struggle. “From being the world’s 
largest port after Rotterdam and New York, London has 
been overhauled by Antwerp, Hamburg, and Le Havre,” 
the British shipping magazine Fairplay warned in 1975. 
“If the present situation is allowed to continue she will 
slip still further down the ‘big league’ and face the grim 
prospect of being relegated to the role of feeder port to 
Ports in a Storm • 279
the continent.” Meanwhile, Felixstowe surged. In 1968, 
the new containerport had handled all of 18,252 loaded 
containers. By 1974, 137,850 loaded boxes passed 
through the port, which was well on its way to becoming 
the major port for British trade with North America. As 
containerization’s economies of scale began to take hold, 
more than 40 percent of all container movements in Brit-
ish harbors would soon occur in a single port, Felixs -
towe, whose traffic at the dawn of the container age had 
been too small even to merit statistical mention.
36
The preparations for container shipping in the United 
States and Europe provided Asian governments a lesson. 
In the United States, ports responded to containerization 
with no overriding rhyme or reason; cities such as New 
York and San Francisco squandered tax money on 
wharves and cranes that had little chance of recouping 
the initial investment, even as cities that might have be-
come important containerports, such as Philadelphia, 
failed to invest in time. In Britain, the government was 
so terrified of the waterfront unions that it took few 
steps to prepare for the container era until the first ships 
were already in port. In continental Europe, the ports 
that had the foresight to plan for container shipping, 
notably Rotterdam, Antwerp, and Bremen, were the first 
to capture the traffic. Along Asia’s Pacific Rim, it seemed 
apparent that containerization would require major 
change, and change had to be planned.37
Time seemed to be on the Asians’ side. The shift from 
breakbulk shipping to container shipping had greatly re-
duced the cost of loading or unloading a vessel, but it 
280 • Chapter 10
made no difference at all in the operating cost once the 
vessel left port. This meant that the benefits from switch-
ing to container shipping were greatest on shorter routes, 
for which the savings in cargo handling and port time 
came to a very large proportion of the total cost of a voy-
age. The experts reckoned that there was less money to 
be saved on long- distance routes involving weeks at sea, 
such as those from the United States to Japan or Britain 
to Australia. Some even argued that containerization was 
infeasible in the Pacific and Australian trades, because 
expensive ships would be tied up for too long and be -
cause returning empty containers across seven thousand 
miles of ocean would prove impossibly expensive.
38
The race to put containerships on the North Atlantic 
by the winter of 1966 drew attention in Asia. In early 
1966, with Sea- Land preparing to deliver containers to 
a U.S. base on the Japanese island of Okinawa, a council 
established by the Japanese transport ministry was issu-
ing directives to promote container services. The trans-
port ministry soon came up with a plan to build twenty- 
two containership berths in Tokyo and in Kobe, near 
Osaka, while Sea- Land developed docks in Yokohama. 
The Australian Maritime Services Board quickly scrapped 
plans to build conventional wharves at Sydney and in -
vited bids for construction of a container terminal in 
September 1966, although no international ship line had 
yet expressed interest in providing containership service 
to Sydney. The first fully containerized ship to serve the 
Far East, belonging to Matson, sailed from Tokyo to San 
Francisco in September 1967, and large- scale container 
shipping arrived the following year. International con -
tainerships came to Australia in 1969, and Sydney, Yo-
Ports in a Storm • 281
kohama, and Melbourne quickly vaulted to the top rank 
among the world’s containerports.39
Other governments were not far behind. Taiwan’s na-
tional port program began planning container terminals 
at five different ports. The Hong Kong Container Com-
mittee, appointed by the British colonial government in 
August 1966, looked at other developments in the west-
ern Pacific and issued a warning that December: “Unless 
a container terminal is available in Hong Kong to serve 
these ships the trading position of the Colony will be af-
fected detrimentally.” And no government anywhere was 
more aggressive in preparing for the container age than 
Singapore’s.
40
Singapore was a new country in the late 1960s, having 
been ejected from Malaysia in 1965 amid armed conflict 
Table 5. Largest Containerports by Tonnage, 1969
Container Cargo
(metric tons)
New York/New Jersey 4,000,800
Oakland 3,001,000
Rotterdam 2,043,131
Sydney 1,589,000
Los Angeles 1,316,000
Antwerp 1,300,000
Yokohama 1,262,000
Melbourne 1,134,200
Felixstowe 925,000
Bremen/Bremerhaven 822,100
Source: Bremer Ausschuß für Wirtschaftsforschung, Container Facili-
ties and Traffic (1971).
282 • Chapter 10
between Malaysia and Indonesia. Its port was more sig-
nificant as a military base than as a shipping hub. The 
British had 35,000 soldiers and sailors on the 
226- square- mile island, and 25,000 civilians worked at 
the bases and the naval shipyards. The commercial port 
comprised a handful of wharves and Singapore Roads, 
the anchorage offshore where cargo was transferred 
from one small trading vessel to another. The amount of 
general cargo actually crossing the docks was about one- 
fifth of that handled in New York. The Port of Singapore 
Authority had been created in 1964 to take responsibil-
ity for most of Singapore’s docks, but it had little to work 
with. The initial value of all of its assets, including apart-
ment complexes and office buildings as well as docks and 
warehouses, was less than $50 million.41
Immediately upon independence, the new government 
launched a crash effort to build the economy by drawing 
foreign investment, especially in manufacturing. Amid a 
general government crackdown on dissent, the Port of 
Singapore Authority was able to slash the size of long-
shore gangs from twenty- seven to twenty- three, institute 
a second shift, and boost by half the amount of cargo 
handled per man- hour. It put forth a plan in 1965 to 
build four berths for conventional ships at a site known 
as the East Lagoon, which had a breakwater but no 
major docks. Within months, the plan was scrapped. The 
containerships that were about to cross the Atlantic had 
captured the interest of port officials. They announced in 
1966 that instead of conventional berths, they would 
build a port for containers.42
Singapore’s strategy was to use containers to become 
the commercial hub of Southeast Asia. With a $15 mil-
Ports in a Storm • 283
lion World Bank loan covering nearly half the cost, the 
port authority began work on a terminal at which long- 
distance vessels from Japan, North America, and Europe 
could hand off containers to smaller ships serving re -
gional ports. Construction started in 1967, the same year 
that the first containers—3,100 of them, mainly emp -
ties—were deposited on the island’s docks. When the 
British announced in 1968 that their bases and naval 
shipyards would close within three years, the govern -
ment countered with even more ambitious plans to build 
ships, develop industry, and expand the port. “It may be 
necessary to embark on further construction depending 
on the build- up of shipping and container traffic,” the 
Port of Singapore Authority advised, even though its first 
container project was barely under way.
43
When large- scale container shipping finally arrived in 
Pacific ports beyond Japan, in 1970, the question of 
whether it would be viable on long- distance routes 
quickly became laughable. The $36 million East Lagoon 
complex opened in June 1972, three months ahead of 
schedule, cementing Singapore’s reputation as an island 
of efficiency. As the only port in the region with docks 
long enough for 900- foot containerships, Singapore be-
came a major transshipment point, with third- generation 
ships handing off containers to smaller vessels that shut-
tled them to Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Phil-
ippines. With longshore gangs reduced to only fifteen 
men and with steep charges on boxes left in the new 
120- acre container yard for more than three days, the 
port ran as smoothly as any in the world.44
Singapore’s containerport grew beyond all expecta -
tions. In 1971, before the new terminal opened, the Port 
284 • Chapter 10
of Singapore Authority forecast 190,000 containers after 
a decade in operation. Instead, it handled more than a 
million boxes in 1982 and was the world’s sixth- largest 
containerport. By 1986, Singapore had more container 
traffic than all the ports of France combined. In 1996, 
more containers passed through Singapore than through 
Japan. In 2005 Singapore became the world’s largest 
port for general cargo, pulling ahead of Hong Kong, and 
some 5,000 international companies were using the 
island- state as a warehousing and distribution hub. By 
2014, the equivalent of 17 million truck- sized containers 
moved across Singapore’s docks and the government- 
owned port management company had itself become a 
multinational enterprise, operating container terminals 
around the world and turning Singapore’s logistical 
know- how into a major export—testimony to the power 
of transportation to reshape the flow of trade.
45
CHAPTER 11
Boom and Bust
On January 10, 1969, the maritime world was shaken 
by an unexpected piece of news. Malcom McLean, the 
father of container shipping, was selling out. Once again, 
his timing was impeccable.
Three years earlier, at the start of 1966, container 
shipping had been an infant industry. Only two ship 
lines, Sea- Land Service and Matson Navigation, moved 
containers in any quantity. Both served only U.S. domes-
tic traffic, using old ships originally built for a very dif-
ferent sort of business. Almost none of the world’s inter-
national trade was containerized, and no port outside 
the United States had the ability to load containers 
aboard ships except by having longshoremen clamber 
atop each box and attach hooks at each corner. Most of 
the world’s manufactured goods and foodstuffs moved 
as they had for a hundred years, painstakingly loaded 
piece by piece into the holds of breakbulk ships. A lead-
ing maritime executive could still hold the opinion, 
voiced in 1966, “I do not think the time for the all- 
container ship is now nor in the next decade.”1
Fast- forward three years and the world had changed. 
The equivalent of 3,400 20- foot containers of commer-
286 • Chapter 11
cial imports or exports passed through U.S. ports each 
week during 1968, up from zero in 1965.* Rotterdam, 
Bremen, Antwerp, Felixstowe, Glasgow, Montreal, Yo-
kohama, Kobe, Saigon, and Cam Ranh Bay all had mod-
ern facilities for handling containers. Revenues at 
McLean’s Sea- Land Service, whose 31 ships made it far 
and away the largest container operator in the world, 
had mushroomed from $102 million in 1965 to $227 
million in 1968 as Sea- Land expanded to Vietnam, West-
ern Europe, and Japan. Container shipping had turned 
into a rip- roaring business—and an extremely expensive 
one. Sea- Land’s debts at the end of 1968 reached $101 
million, $22 million of which was payable within the 
year. During 1969 it was to take possession of six more 
rebuilt ships costing an additional $39 million, plus $32 
million for containers and equipment.
2
The financial demands would only grow, for the mari-
time equivalent of an arms race was under way.
The first generation of containerships, the ones that 
had plied the East and Gulf coasts and brought the con-
tainer revolution to Puerto Rico and Hawaii, Alaska and 
Europe, had consisted almost entirely of older vessels, 
originally built for other purposes. Most of them were 
* The quantity of breakbulk shipping was measured either by weight or by 
“measurement tons,” a standard method for converting volume into tonnage, 
and these conventions were initially applied to container cargo. The capacity 
of containerships and cranes, however, was determined by the quantity of 
containers rather than their weight, and by the mid- 1960s ports and ship lines 
began to emphasize the number of containers they handled. Raw numbers 
proved problematic, because they failed to distinguish between empty con-
tainers and full ones, and between large containers and small ones. In 1968, 
the Maritime Administration began to report container traffic in standardized 
20- foot equivalent units, or TEUs. A 40- foot container represents 2 TEUs, 
and one of Matson’s 24- foot boxes registered as 1.2 TEUs.
Boom and Bust • 287
small, about 500 feet long, and very slow, straining to 
steam at 16 or 17 knots. Many of these early container 
vessels carried only a couple hundred containers along 
with breakbulk freight, refrigerated cargo, even passen-
gers. Only three ships in the entire world were equipped 
with enough container cells to hold more than 1,000 
20- foot containers. The first- generation containerships 
had cost the ship lines almost nothing; of the 77 U.S.- flag 
ships equipped to carry containers at the end of 1968, 53 
were relics of World War II. Most lines had no ships with 
container cells in their holds and desperately tried to 
meet customers’ demands by packing containers into 
conventional breakbulk ships. Breakbulk ships, however, 
were hard to service with high- speed container cranes. 
Each time a container was to be moved, longshoremen 
would have to climb atop the box, attach hooks at the 
corners, and then remove the hooks once the container 
had been lifted. With none of the operating efficiencies 
of cellular containerships, most carriers were losing 
money on every container they carried.3
The second generation of containerships was of a to-
tally different order. Sixteen of these newly built ships 
were at sea by the end of 1969, and another 50 were 
under construction. These vessels were designed from the 
start to work smoothly with dockside container cranes. 
They were large, they were fast, and they came with very 
high price tags.
The first of these new vessels was American Lancer, 
owned by United States Lines, Sea- Land’s biggest com-
petitor across the North Atlantic. The Lancer, which 
made its maiden voyage between Newark and Rotter -
dam, London, and Hamburg in May 1968, was far big-
288 • Chapter 11
ger than any other containership on the seas. It could 
carry 1,210 20- foot containers at a speed of 23 knots—
half again as fast as the reconstructed ships in Sea- Land’s 
fleet. In August 1968, United States Lines asked the Mar-
itime Administration for a $95 million subsidy to build 
six more such behemoths. Other American, European, 
and Japanese companies raced to place their orders. Al-
most always, a ship was designed with a specific route in 
mind. Atlantic vessels usually held 1,000–1,200 contain-
ers, because too large a ship meant too much port time 
after a relatively short voyage. Ships meant for the Asia 
trades were typically larger, carrying 1,300–1,600 20- 
foot containers, because the relatively long ocean voy -
ages from Europe or America to Japan generated enough 
additional revenue to cover the added construction cost.4
The expense of building and equipping these second- 
generation containerships staggered even the largest ship 
lines. Between 1967 and the end of 1972, a consultant 
would later calculate, the total cost of containerization 
around the world would come to nearly $10 billion—an 
amount close to $60 billion in 2015 dollars. Individual 
European ship lines had no prospect of raising financing 
of this magnitude: the total after- tax profit of all thirty- 
seven British steamship companies in 1966 came to less 
than £6 million. With few alternatives, the British formed 
consortia such as Overseas Containers Ltd., whose mem-
bers shared the $185 million cost of building six ships, 
and containers to go with them, between 1967 and 1969. 
The smaller Belgian, French, and Scandinavian carriers 
sought strength in numbers as well. If four ship lines 
joined forces, each building one or two vessels, in com-
Boom and Bust • 289
bination they might have enough ships to be significant 
players.5
The American carriers were slightly more prosperous, 
thanks to government subsidies and military shipments, 
but they were hardly rolling in money. Sea- Land gener-
ated a total of $30 million of profit from 1965 through 
1967, almost all of it on domestic routes. The largest 
American ship line, United States Lines, earned $4 mil-
lion of profit over those three years. The Americans were 
not forced into joint ventures, though, because they had 
an option that the Europeans did not. The American con-
glomerates that aspired to remake the business world in 
the late 1960s spotted opportunity in the traditionally 
low- profit maritime industry, and they wanted to be in 
on the container boom. Litton Industries, of course, had 
invested in Sea- Land. Walter Kidde & Co. opened its 
wallet to buy United States Lines in January 1969. City 
Investing, another conglomerate, won a bidding war for 
Moore- McCormack Lines until the ship line reported a 
big loss for 1968 and the deal fell apart. The “cold, prag-
matical thinking” of conglomerates threatened the in -
dustry, a maritime executive complained in 1968. “Such 
conglomerates, the newcomers, assign no value to the 
romance of the sea or the traditions of the railroads and 
the highways. They are strictly readers of the bottom 
lines of financial reports.”6
No conglomerate chieftain was a more avid reader of 
financial reports than Malcom McLean. He knew what 
the cost of competition was going to be, and he knew 
that Sea- Land, its balance sheet stretched to the limit, 
had no hope of borrowing the money. His previous con-
290 • Chapter 11
glomerate backer, Litton, which held 10 percent of Sea- 
Land’s shares, was tapped out. McLean turned toward 
an entirely unexpected source of funds: R. J. Reynolds 
Industries. Reynolds, based in Winston- Salem, North 
Carolina, was the nation’s largest tobacco company. Its 
cigarette business threw off cash by the bucketful, and its 
managers were using that cash to turn the company into 
a conglomerate. U.S. cigarette consumption had fallen in 
1968, and impending restrictions on marketing—the 
government would ban cigarette advertising on Ameri -
can television at the start of 1971—boded ill for its core 
business. The ship line’s endless investment needs would 
provide Reynolds with a convenient shelter from corpo-
rate income tax. An added inducement was McLean’s 
status as a local genius—he had moved McLean Truck-
ing to Winston- Salem after World War II and had lived 
there for a decade. Reynolds offered $530 million, with 
McLean Industries’ shareholders free to choose between 
Reynolds securities and $50 per share in cash. Litton 
Industries cashed out at a huge profit, as did Daniel K. 
Ludwig: the $8.5 million that Ludwig had invested in 
Sea- Land in 1965 now was worth $50 million. Many 
Sea- Land executives, shocked by word of their compa-
ny’s sale, instantly became very wealthy men.
7
If anyone doubted McLean’s timing, his wisdom soon 
became clear. In October 1968, he had commissioned 
designs for an entirely new kind of containership, the 
SL- 7. The SL- 7 was meant to leave United States Lines’ 
new Lancer looking as outdated as a Liberty Ship. It 
would be nearly a thousand feet long, just a few feet 
shorter than the famed Queen Mary. Its capacity was 
1,096 of Sea- Land’s 35- foot containers, equivalent to 
Boom and Bust • 291
more than 1,900 20- foot boxes—a far greater load than 
any other ship afloat. Its most striking characteristic, 
though, was its speed. The SL- 7 would travel at 33 knots, 
twice as fast as any ship in the Sea- Land fleet. It would 
be fast enough to sail around the world in 56 days, so 
fast that a fleet of eight ships could provide a round- the- 
world sailing from each major port each week. United 
States Lines boasted that the Lancer and its sister ships 
could deliver a container from Newark to Rotterdam in 
6½ days. The SL- 7s would do it in 4½ days and could 
cross the Pacific from Oakland to Yokohama in just 5½ 
days. Only one commercial ship ever built, the venerable 
passenger liner United States, was fast enough to keep up 
with it.8
More was at work than megalomania. McLean, once 
more, had conceived a way to gain a strategic edge. He 
planned to deploy the new ships in the Pacific. Sea- Land 
was a conference carrier in the Pacific, charging the same 
rates as its competitors. The SL- 7s’ faster transit time 
would help Sea- Land attract cargo, and other carriers, 
bound by the conference agreement, would not be able 
to drop their rates in response. In the summer of 1969, 
the Sea- Land division of R. J. Reynolds Industries made 
its plans for the SL- 7 public, ordering eight vessels from 
European shipyards. The price tag was $32 million per 
ship. Containers and other equipment would bring the 
total cost of the SL- 7s to $435 million. For McLean In-
dustries, even if it could have raised the money, spending 
nearly half a billion dollars on ships would have been a 
bet- the- company gamble. For R. J. Reynolds, it was al-
most spare change. The tobacco giant was so cash rich 
that in 1970 it purchased a petroleum company, Ameri-
292 • Chapter 11
can Independent Oil Company, to provide a cheap source 
of fuel for Sea- Land’s expanding fleet.9
The first stage of the container boom occurred entirely 
on the North Atlantic. The second happened on the Pa-
cific. Matson sailed the first fully containerized ship from 
Japan in September 1967, in what it thought would be a 
partnership with Japanese ship lines. Having learned the 
business, the Japanese soon left Matson behind and 
began their own container service to California in Sep-
tember 1968. Sea- Land, using containerships headed 
home from Vietnam, began carrying 35- foot boxes from 
Yokohama and Kobe the following month. If there had 
been any doubt about whether Japanese exporters would 
adopt containerization, it was settled quickly. Within a 
year, container tonnage between Japan and California 
was two- thirds that across the North Atlantic. The im-
pact on trade flows was immediate. Japanese seaborne 
exports, 27.1 million metric tons in 1967, rose to 30.3 
million with the start of containerization late in 1968 
and then soared to 40.6 million tons in 1969, the first 
full year of container service to California. The value of 
Japanese exports to the United States leaped 21 percent 
in 1969 alone.
10
Cars, which did not travel in containers, accounted for 
part of the export surge. Much of the increased trade, 
however, was stimulated by containerization. Within 
three years, nearly one- third of Japanese exports to the 
United States were containerized, as were half of Japan’s 
exports to Australia.
11
Electronics manufacturers had been among the first 
Japanese exporters to see the advantages of shipping their 
Boom and Bust • 293
fragile, theft- prone products in containers. Electronics 
exports had been on the rise since the early 1960s, but 
the lower freight rates, inventory costs, and insurance 
losses from container shipping helped turn Japanese 
products into everyday items in the United States, and 
soon in Western Europe. Exports of televisions climbed 
from 3.5 million sets in 1968 to 6.2 million in 1971. 
Shipments of tape recorders went from 10.5 million to 
20.2 million units over the same three years. Container-
ization even gave new life to Japanese clothing and tex-
tile plants. Rising wages had put an end to the growth of 
Japan’s apparel exports in 1967, but the drop in shipping 
costs briefly made it viable for Japanese clothing manu-
facturers to sell in America again.
12
In 1969, as United States Lines was preparing to add 
eight fast containerships to its U.S.–Japan service, the 
Japanese government put shipping at the center of its 
economic development strategy. Its new five- year plan 
called for a 50 percent expansion of Japan’s merchant 
fleet, including tankers and ore carriers as well as con -
tainerships. The government offered $440 million to 
help Japanese ship lines begin container service to New 
York, the Pacific Northwest, and Southeast Asia, using 
Japanese- built ships. The subsidies were an incredible 
bargain. A ship line needed to put up only 5 percent of 
the cost of building its new vessel. The government de-
velopment bank provided most of the funds. No pay -
ments were due for three years, after which the ship line 
was to repay the loan over ten years at an interest rate of 
5.5 percent—a lower rate than the Japanese government 
paid to borrow the money that its development bank lent 
out. The remainder of the construction cost came from 
294 • Chapter 11
commercial banks, with the government paying 2 per -
centage points of interest. With such giveaway terms, 
Japanese ship lines had no fewer than 158 vessels on 
order or under construction by the end of 1970, all in 
Japanese shipyards.13
Hong Kong received its first visit from a fully contain-
erized ship in July 1969, even before its container termi-
nal was ready. The following year, as Sea- Land opened 
container service to South Korea and Matson began bi-
weekly visits to Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the Philippines, 
container capacity on transpacific routes reached nearly 
a quarter million units in 73 vessels. Other new services 
linked Australia to Europe, North America, and Japan. 
Regular sailings with fully containerized ships between 
Europe and the Far East began in 1971.
14
Shipyards around the world were choked with new 
orders. East Asia’s ports, with years to prepare them -
selves, were ready and waiting as the new vessels came 
on line in 1971 and 1972. Trade soared, as a story similar 
to Japan’s was repeated along the Pacific Rim. Ocean -
borne exports from South Korea, 2.9 million tons in 
1969, reached 6 million tons in 1973. Korean exports to 
the United States trebled over those three years as lower 
shipping costs made its garments competitive in the U.S. 
market. Hong Kong followed much the same course. Be-
fore it filled ninety- five acres of harbor to build a con -
tainerport, the colony’s shipping had been so primitive 
that oceangoing ships anchored far out in the harbor, 
and small boats shuttled imports and exports back and 
forth to shore. With the new terminal allowing contain-
erships to collect cargo straight from the dock, Hong 
Kong’s shipments of clothing, plastic goods, and small 
Boom and Bust • 295
electronics rose from 3 million tons in 1970 to 3.8 mil-
lion in 1972, and the value of its foreign trade rose 35 
percent.
Exports from Taiwan, $1.4 billion in 1970, were $4.3 
billion by 1973, and imports more than doubled. The 
pattern in Singapore was much the same. In Australia, 
the opening of container traffic coincided with a surge in 
manufactured exports and a dramatic shift away from 
traditional exports such as meat, ore, and greasy wool. 
The volume of exports other than minerals or farm prod-
ucts rose 16 percent annually from 1966–67 to 1969–70. 
Prior to 1968, the value of Australia’s industrial exports 
typically came to less than half its exports of grain and 
meat. By 1970, most of Australia’s general- merchandise 
trade was already moving in containers, and factory ex-
ports nearly matched farm exports. In the process, Aus-
tralia left behind its past as a resource- based economy 
and began to develop a much more balanced economic 
structure.
15
The container cannot claim sole credit for this burst 
of international commerce, but it is entitled to a share. A 
1972 study by McKinsey & Company, an international 
consulting firm, laid out some of the ways in which con-
tainerization stimulated trade between Europe and Aus-
tralia, where containers came into use on mixed vessels 
in 1967 and fully containerized ships opened service in 
1969. Previously, Australia- bound ships had spent weeks 
calling at any of eleven European ports before starting 
the southbound voyage. Containerships collected cargo 
only at the large containerports at Tilbury, Hamburg, 
and Rotterdam, whose size kept the cost of handling 
each container low. Previously, shipments took a mini-
296 • Chapter 11
mum of 70 days to get from Hamburg to Sydney, with 
each additional port call adding to the time; container -
ships offered a transit time of 34 days, eliminating at 
least 36 days’ worth of carrying costs. Insurance claims 
for Europe–Australia service were running 85 percent 
lower than in the days of breakbulk freight. Packaging 
costs were much lower, and ocean shipping rates them-
selves had dropped. The total savings from containeriza-
tion were so great that traditional ships abandoned the 
Australia route almost immediately.
16
The breakneck construction of new containerships 
transformed the world’s merchant fleet. In 1967, 50 
American- owned vessels, most of them built during 
World War II and rebuilt during the 1950s or 1960s, ac-
counted for all but a handful of the fully containerized 
ships in operation around the world. From 1968 through 
1975, no fewer than 406 containerships entered service. 
Most of the new vessels were at least twice as large as 
any that had been on the scene in 1967. Beyond these 
fully containerized vessels, ship lines added more than 
200 partially containerized ships, with container cells 
built into some of their holds but not others, and almost 
300 roll on–roll off ships to serve routes that lacked the 
volume to justify containerships. With these hundreds of 
new vessels, container shipping was coming into full 
flower.17
The U.S. merchant fleet changed almost overnight. In 
1968, there were still 615 general- cargo freighters flying 
the U.S. flag. Within the next six years, more than half of 
those vessels had left American- flag service, either cast 
off to the tenuous ship lines of poor countries or sold for 
scrap. Replacing them were fewer but much larger and 
Boom and Bust • 297
faster ships. The American seamen’s unions were wont 
to cite the diminished fleet as a sign of maritime weak-
ness, but the truth is that the few dozen new container -
ships could carry far more cargo than the hundreds of 
rust buckets they supplanted. Even as the U.S.- flag fleet 
shrank nearly by half, the number of vessels able to carry 
more than 15,000 tons of cargo rose from 49 in 1968 to 
119 in 1974. New steam- turbine engines helped boost 
the average speed of large U.S.- flag freighters from just 
17 knots in 1968 to 21 knots in 1974. The difference was 
enough to cut a full day off a transatlantic crossing.18
The launch of so many vessels resulted in a quantum 
jump in capacity. The basic economics of containeriza -
tion dictated as much. Once a ship line had made the 
decision to introduce containerships on a particular route, 
other carriers in the trade normally followed swiftly lest 
they be left behind. The capital- intensive nature of con-
tainer shipping put a premium on size; quite unlike 
breakbulk shipping, in which an owner of “tramp” ships 
could eke out a profit picking up freight wherever it 
could be found, a container line needed enough ships, 
containers, and chassis to run a high- frequency service 
between major ports on a regular schedule. When a ship 
line decided to enter a trade, it had to do so in a large 
way—which meant that on every major route, several 
competitors were entering with several vessels apiece. 
Capacity on the largest international routes increased 
fourteen times over between 1968 and 1974. Between 
the United States and northern Europe, where only a 
handful of small containers had moved prior to 1966, 
there were enough new ships to carry nearly a million 
boxes a year by 1974. The containership route between 
298 • Chapter 11
Japan and the U.S. Atlantic Coast, opened only in 1970, 
was served by thirty vessels in 1973.19
Demand, robust though it was, could not possibly keep 
up with this explosion of supply. The result was a new 
and painful experience for the shipping industry: a rate 
war.
Overcapacity was an old story in ocean shipping. The 
flow of cargo had always been volatile, based on eco -
nomic growth, changes in tariffs and trade restrictions, 
and political factors such as wars and embargoes. In the 
1950s and 1960s, though, a temporary imbalance be -
tween the amount of space on breakbulk ships and the 
amount of general cargo usually was not a fatal problem. 
The war- surplus ships that filled most merchant fleets 
had been acquired for little or nothing, so shipowners 
were not saddled with huge mortgage payments. Their 
main expenses—cargo handling, fees for the use of docks, 
pay for crews, fuel—were operating costs. If business 
was bad, the shipowner could lay the vessel up and most 
of the costs would go away.
The economics of container shipping were fundamen-
tally different. The huge sums borrowed to buy ships, 
containers, and chassis required regular payments of in-
terest and principal. State- of- the- art container terminals 
meant either debt service, if a ship line had borrowed to 
build its own terminal, or rent, if the terminal was leased 
from a port agency. Those fixed costs accounted for up 
to three- quarters of the total cost of running a container 
operation, and they had to be paid no matter how much 
cargo was available. No company could afford to lay up 
a containership just because there was too little cargo. So 
Boom and Bust • 299
long as each voyage collected enough revenue to cover 
operating costs, the ship had to keep moving. In con -
tainer shipping, quite unlike breakbulk, overcapacity 
would not diminish as owners temporarily idled their 
ships. Instead, rates would fall as carriers struggled to 
win every available box, and overcapacity would persist 
until the demand for shipping space eventually caught up 
with the supply.20
Overcapacity preoccupied everyone connected with 
containerization. “Now that standardized containers 
have been introduced, the rush to ‘get on the bandwagon’ 
will probably lead to substantial overexpansion,” a study 
for the British government warned in 1967. By one early 
estimate, 5 ships carrying 1,200 containers each, sailing 
at 25 knots, could move all of the U.S.–U.K. trade that 
could be containerized. By another, just 25 ships could 
handle the entire general- cargo trade between Europe 
and North America. A third estimate foresaw that the 5 
ships ordered by the American carrier Farrell Line would 
be adequate for all of Australia’s exports to the United 
States. With hundreds of containerships on order, ex -
perts projected that half the available container slots 
across both the Atlantic and the Pacific would go unused 
by 1974. In the North Atlantic, “by the early 1970s there 
will be excess container capacity,” a study for the U.S. 
government predicted in 1968.21
The wolf was at the door even sooner than antici -
pated. In early 1967, less than a year after fully cellular 
containerships entered the trade, the North Atlantic con-
ferences cut rates for containers by 10 percent—an ac-
tion that a leading U.S. shipping executive termed “a 
disaster.” That was only the beginning. With too many 
300 • Chapter 11
ships chasing too little cargo, the long- standing structure 
of ocean freight rates began to fall apart.22
Prices for international shipping, unlike domestic 
shipping, usually were not set by government regulators. 
Instead, rate setting was the realm of liner conferences, 
voluntary cartels of the operators on each route. No 
fewer than 110 different conferences set rates on routes 
to or from the United States, and similar conferences 
governed routes elsewhere in the world. The conference 
members negotiated a rate schedule among themselves 
and often assigned each member ship line a percentage 
of the total traffic. All shippers using conference carriers 
were supposed to pay the official rates, with no special 
deals, although cheating was common; “rebating,” se -
cretly refunding part of a shipper’s payments, was a 
widespread if illegal practice. Conferences in trades serv-
ing the United States were required to publish their rates 
and to be “open”—that is, to accept new lines that 
wished to join—but many other routes around the world 
featured confidential rates and “closed” conferences that 
excluded newcomers. On most routes, governments did 
not require ship lines to be conference members—but if 
a carrier began operating as an “independent,” it was 
likely to find the conference letting its members slash 
rates and add capacity in order to destroy the intruder. 
Most of the time, all carriers had an interest in going 
along with the system.23
The conferences structured their rates very much as 
railroads did. There was a separate rate for each com -
modity, or sometimes two rates, one measured by weight 
and one by volume. For breakbulk shipping, there was 
logic behind this: some commodities were more compli-
Boom and Bust • 301
cated to load than others, some took more shipboard 
space and some less, and different rates were a way to 
recognize the differing costs. Applied to containers, the 
commodity- based system made no sense at all: a ship 
line’s cost to move a 40- foot container of bicycle tires was 
identical to its cost for a 40- foot container of table lamps. 
When containers appeared, though, the conferences, 
dominated by companies that still sailed breakbulk ships, 
relied on the tried- and- true system of commodity- based 
rates. On the North Atlantic, the rate per ton for a prod-
uct shipped in a container was the same as if it were 
shipped breakbulk, with a discount of 5 to 10 percent for 
a full container of a single commodity. Rates for mixed 
freight made even less sense. When the Europe–Australia 
conference set container rates in 1967, a year before con-
tainership service opened, it decreed that each commod-
ity in a mixed container would be charged the per- ton 
rate for that commodity. The only way to find the correct 
rate was to open the container and weigh every single 
item inside.24
This economically illogical system could not last. Ship 
lines had no reason to care what was inside the contain-
ers they carried, and with rampant excess capacity they 
were willing to accept any payment that exceeded their 
cost to carry the container. By early 1967, Waterman 
Steamship, Malcom McLean’s former company, switched 
to a flat rate for shipments from the United States to 
southern Europe: $400 for a shipper- owned 20- foot con-
tainer, $800 for a 40- foot container, regardless of the 
contents. Waterman did not yet have any containerships 
and its rate structure had no imitators, but its move re-
veals the pressure on prices. Carriers began threatening 
302 • Chapter 11
to leave their conferences unless rates came down. The 
conferences struggled vainly to keep the rate structure 
intact. In the summer of 1969, the transatlantic confer -
ence system blew apart. Eight lines formed a new confer-
ence with the aim of leaving commodity- based rates be-
hind and establishing rates that made sense in the world 
of containers.
25
As the artificially high rate structure collapsed, ship 
lines faced a profit squeeze. Restructuring was the only 
way out. In July 1969, barely three years after container 
shipping had become an international business, West 
Germany’s two biggest shipping companies agreed to 
merge as Hapag- Lloyd, becoming a major player in the 
North Atlantic. Three months later, Malcom McLean re-
sponded in kind. McLean had always preferred consoli-
dation to competition; had the U.S. government not 
blocked him, he would have acquired Sea- Land’s sole 
East Coast competitor, Seatrain Lines, in 1959, and its 
main competitor to Puerto Rico, Bull Line, in 1962. 
Now, on Sea- Land’s behalf, he committed $1.2 billion of 
R. J. Reynolds’s money to an audacious deal with United 
States Lines. U.S. Lines was in the midst of building 16 
containerships, all able to carry more than 1,000 con -
tainers and to steam faster than 20 knots. It would soon 
have the greatest containership capacity of any line. Sea- 
Land proposed to lease that entire fleet, all 16 vessels, for 
20 years. United States Lines would surrender its status 
as a subsidized carrier, which would allow Sea- Land to 
deploy the ships wherever it wanted, without govern -
ment approval. A major competitor would be out of the 
game, and Sea- Land would become by far the largest 
ship line on both the Atlantic and the Pacific.26
Boom and Bust • 303
Competitors cried foul—but they reacted promptly.  
In early 1970, Grace Line was merged into Prudential 
Lines. Matson surrendered its international ambitions, 
selling its ships in 1970 and giving up its efforts to turn 
Honolulu into a hub for commerce across the Pacific. 
Moore- McCormack Lines sold its four newest freighters 
and exited the North Atlantic. Two British carriers, Ben 
Line and Ellerman Line, joined forces on the U.K.–Far 
East route, and three Scandinavian companies combined 
their ships to create a single international carrier called 
Scanservice.
Those shifts were far from enough to stabilize the in-
dustry. In the Australia trade, Overseas Containers Ltd. 
lost $36 million between 1969 and 1971. Hapag- Lloyd 
suffered losses in 1969, 1970, and again in 1971. On the 
North Atlantic, where one- third of containership capac-
ity was unutilized, American Export Isbrandtsen Line 
lost so much money in 1970 and 1971 that its parent 
company’s shares were suspended from trading on the 
New York Stock Exchange and its president was forced 
out. United States Lines, operating in both the Atlantic 
and the Pacific, lost $14 million in 1970 and as much 
again the following year. Even Sea- Land had a difficult 
passage after the U.S. government blocked its efforts to 
combine with United States Lines, its profit falling from 
$39 million in 1969 to $21 million in 1970 and barely 
$12 million in 1971. R. J. Reynolds, like the other con-
glomerates that had invested in ship lines, was learning 
that container shipping was not the gold mine it had 
imagined.27
In desperation, the leading carriers on important 
routes tried an old- fashioned solution: reducing compe-
304 • Chapter 11
tition. Five competitors in the Europe–Far East trade, 
two British, two Japanese, and the German Hapag- 
Lloyd, combined their Pacific interests in an alliance 
called TRIO. Among them, the companies agreed to 
build nineteen large ships, with each company allocated 
a number of container slots on each ship. A second Eu-
rope–Pacific consortium soon followed, with the Swed-
ish carriers and the Dutch company Nedlloyd merging 
their Asian operations into a company called ScanDutch. 
Those two alliances drastically cut the number of com-
petitors between Europe and Japan, helping stabilize 
rates. An even more powerful cartel, the North Atlantic 
Pool Agreement, was born in June 1971. The pool agree-
ment, strongly backed by six European governments, 
combined the efforts of what had been fifteen separate 
ship lines from six countries. It spelled out exactly what 
percentage of the total cargo each company would carry. 
All of the members agreed to charge identical rates, and 
revenues from North America–Europe service were to be 
shared. The cartel managed finally to put a floor under 
rates. “Without the pool, a lot of us would go under,” one 
executive admitted in 1972.28
Economic growth around the world picked up in 
1972, and with it the flow of trade. Container tonnage 
nearly doubled from 1971 to 1973, and as carriers fi-
nally found enough cargo to fill their ships, they earned 
profits once more. But the shipping industry that sur -
vived the carnage of containerization’s first rate cycle 
was quite different from the one that had existed in 
1967. Far fewer independent companies were left, and 
they had no illusions about the future. Rate wars would 
obviously be a permanent feature of the container ship-
Boom and Bust • 305
ping industry, recurring every time the world economy 
turned down or ship lines expanded their fleets. Ship -
pers would pay according to the distance their contain-
ers traveled, regardless of the weight or the nature of the 
contents, and in difficult times rates would dip so low 
that carriers would barely cover their operating costs. 
Ship lines would be under constant pressure to build 
bigger ships and faster cranes to reduce the cost of han-
dling each container, because at some point overcapac-
ity would return, and when rates collapsed the carrier 
with the lowest cost would have the best chance of 
survival.29
The next collapse was not long in coming.
The years 1972 and 1973, as it turned out, represented 
a peaceful interlude in an economically turbulent decade. 
Industrial production rose 18 percent in the United 
States, 19 percent in Canada, 22 percent in Japan, 12 
percent in Europe. International trade grew strongly 
enough to transform the glut of container shipping into 
a shortage, despite the launch of 143 containerships in 
just two years. The sharp rise in oil prices that began in 
1973 proved initially to be an unexpected blessing for 
the maritime industry, giving containerships, which 
transported more cargo per barrel of oil, a further cost 
advantage over the remaining breakbulk ships. The 
amount of containerized ocean cargo around the world 
rose 40 percent in 1973 alone. Companies ordered their 
ships to reduce speed in order to conserve fuel, cutting 
the number of voyages they could make over the course 
of a year, which further tightened the market. Freight 
rates soared, as conferences pushed through hundreds of 
306 • Chapter 11
rate increases and added surcharges to cover exchange- 
rate movements, higher fuel costs, and port delays. 
“Many shippers, faced with rate increases of over 15 per 
cent plus surcharges, must have found their freight bills 
increased by as much as 25 to 30 percent,” a United Na-
tions report declared.
30
The boom lasted into 1974, when a weaker dollar 
drove exports from U.S. factories up 42 percent in a 
single year. Rate increases, along with the various agree-
ments around the world to limit capacity, pool revenues, 
or join forces, finally worked magic on the shipping in-
dustry’s bottom line. Sea- Land reported a healthy $142 
million profit, up from $16 million in 1973. Even United 
States Lines, which had seen little besides red ink out of 
its sixteen new containerships, posted a $16 million 
profit for 1974. Judged the head of Atlantic Container 
Line, “If an operator can’t make it on the North Atlantic 
now, he will never make it.”
31
The oil crisis, though, ended up devastating the ship-
ping industry. The world economy tumbled into reces -
sion in the second half of 1974 as central banks tight -
ened monetary policy to counteract the inflationary 
consequences of dearer oil. Industrial production col -
lapsed, and with it the flow of trade. World exports of 
manufactured goods fell in 1975 for the first time since 
the war, and the amount of seaborne trade dropped 6 
percent. Even as trade flows diminished, shipyards kept 
delivering new containerships—and every new ship 
weakened the ship lines’ ability to hold rates up. Con -
tainerships from the Soviet Union joined the competition 
in both the Atlantic and the Pacific outside the confer -
ence structure, pressuring rates further. The shipping 
Boom and Bust • 307
conferences were forced to roll back or eliminate sur -
charges six hundred times between 1974 and 1976.32
The second crisis of container shipping was made 
worse by the carriers’ own choices. The hundreds of con-
tainerships built in the first half of the 1970s had been 
designed for the world of the late 1960s. High speed was 
important because of the closure of the Suez Canal in the 
1967 Arab- Israeli war, which forced ship traffic between 
Europe and Asia and Australia to take a much longer 
route around the tip of Africa. High fuel consumption—
the inevitable result of high speed—did not much matter, 
because oil was cheap. The world of the mid- 1970s was 
totally different. The price of fuel quadrupled. On the 
North Atlantic, fuel went from one- fourth of operating 
costs in 1972 to half in 1975. On the Europe–Far East 
route, the unexpectedly fast reopening of the Suez Canal 
in June 1975 eliminated the reason for having fuel- 
guzzling high- speed ships to sail around Africa. Many 
carriers were stuck with the wrong vessels for the times.33
Prominent among them was the Sea- Land division of 
R. J. Reynolds Industries. Malcom McLean, acting, per 
usual, on intuition rather than cautious analysis, had 
overridden objections from Sea- Land’s board to move 
ahead with the SL- 7 in 1968, and Reynolds had agreed 
to build eight of the ships when it bought the ship line in 
1969. The costliest merchant ships ever built were also 
the thirstiest, each burning five hundred tons of fuel per 
day. At full speed, they consumed three times as much 
fuel per container as competitors’ vessels. When the price 
of bunker fuel jumped from $22 per ton to $70 within a 
matter of months, the SL- 7s became a crushing burden. 
Although R. J. Reynolds boasted to its shareholders that 
308 • Chapter 11
the SL- 7s “provide the fastest container shipping service 
in the world,” the ships consistently missed their ambi-
tious schedules and could not make money.
34
A settling of scores was inevitable. McLean, unhappy 
with Reynolds’s bureaucratic ways, began selling his 
stock in 1975 and left the board in 1977. Reynolds, frus-
trated with its inability to control the extraordinary 
volatility of the steamship business, reorganized Sea- 
Land to put the ship line under tighter corporate control. 
The changes did not help. In 1980, Reynolds finally took 
a $150 million loss on the SL- 7s, which had been in ser-
vice for less than eight years, and dumped them on the 
U.S. navy for rebuilding as fast supply ships. Four years 
later, it got out of the shipping business altogether and 
spun off Sea- Land as an independent company. As R. J. 
Reynolds’s new management explained to investment 
analysts, “investors who might be interested in owning 
RJR stock were not the type who ordinarily would be 
interested in a capital- intensive, cyclical transportation 
company.”35
Quite so. For R. J. Reynolds, and for the other corpo-
rations that had chased fast growth by buying into con-
tainer shipping in the late 1960s, their investments 
brought little but disappointment. Sea- Land and its com-
petitors were not at all like Polaroid or Xerox, compa-
nies whose proprietary technology and constant stream 
of innovations provided inordinately high profits for 
decades. Ship lines’ end product was basically a com -
modity. Just like farmers and steelmakers, they would 
always be hostage to external forces, their prices and 
profit margins depending mainly on economic growth 
and on their competitors’ decisions to build new ships. 
Boom and Bust • 309
The go- go years were over. By 1976, less than a decade 
after container shipping became an international busi -
ness, the Financial Times could declare that “the revolu-
tionary impact of containerization, the biggest advance 
in freight movement for generations, has largely worked 
itself out.”
36
Except that the Financial Times got it wrong. The 
revolutionary impact of containerization, as it turned 
out, was yet to come.
CHAPTER 12
The Bigness Complex
Malcom McLean sold his stock and quietly left the 
board of R. J. Reynolds Industries in February 1977. By 
all accounts, the marriage had not been a happy one. 
McLean was frustrated by the tobacco giant’s bureau -
cracy and bewildered by its repeated changes of strategy. 
Most of all, though, he was restless. “I am a builder, and 
they are runners,” McLean explained. “You cannot put 
a builder in with a bunch of runners. You just throw 
them out of kilter.”1
After giving up day- to- day responsibility for Sea- Land 
Service in 1970, he had spent $9 million to buy Pine-
hurst, the famed golf resort in central North Carolina, 
not far from his birthplace in Maxton. He acquired a 
small life insurance company, an estate in Alabama, a 
trading company. Then, in 1973, he started First Colony 
Farms on 440,000 acres in the swamps of eastern North 
Carolina. Modeled after his friend Daniel Ludwig’s plan-
tation in the Amazon, First Colony was probably the 
largest agricultural development in U.S. history. McLean 
spent millions draining wetlands to start a massive peat- 
harvesting operation, then built a plant to turn the peat 
into methanol. Nearby he planned the world’s largest 
The Bigness Complex • 311
hog farm, where the hogs would be raised mechanically 
to slaughter weight and then shipped to a slaughterhouse 
he would build on- site. The peat scheme, though, was 
blocked by one of the earliest environmentalist cam -
paigns, and the hog farm, able to raise 100,000 animals 
a year, never made money. When he got an offer for the 
hog farm in 1977, McLean sold—for $12 million plus 40 
percent of the profits for twenty years—and looked 
around for something new.2
In October 1977, he found it. To the surprise of almost 
everyone, he arranged to buy United States Lines.
United States Lines was not exactly a prize. It had  
long since been supplanted by Sea- Land as the largest 
American- flag ship line, and its owner, the conglomerate 
Walter Kidde & Co., had been trying to unload it almost 
since the day it purchased the company in 1969. Its fa-
mous flagship, the luxury liner United States, had been 
sold off to the U.S. government. United States Lines had 
lost money through most of the 1970s. Nonetheless, Mc-
Lean spotted value. For an investment of $160 million, 
of which $50 million went to pay off debts, he got thirty 
ships; $50 million in cash; a new container terminal on 
Staten Island, in New York Harbor; and an important 
network of routes to Europe and Asia. United States 
Lines, unlike Sea- Land, was entitled to operating subsi-
dies from the U.S. government on its international routes. 
The subsidies were a curse as well as a blessing: the ship 
line was assured a source of revenue, but the Maritime 
Administration got to dictate where and how often its 
ships sailed.
In 1978, as his new ship line was eking out a very mod-
est profit, McLean hatched an audacious plan. United 
312 • Chapter 12
States Lines would build a series of immense container -
ships, half again as large as anything else on the sea, and 
send them around the world. The timing was right, be-
cause shipbuilders’ order books were shrinking after the 
headlong expansion of the 1970s and construction prices 
were falling. A round- the- world route, McLean thought, 
would solve one of the industry’s inherent problems, the 
imbalanced flow of freight that left some ships sailing 
full in one direction and half- empty in the other. The new 
vessels would have the lowest construction cost per con-
tainer slot of any vessel in the world and the lowest op-
erating costs per container as well. United States Lines 
would achieve what it took to succeed in container ship-
ping: scale.
Scale was the holy grail of the maritime industry by 
the late 1970s. Bigger ships lowered the cost of carrying 
each container. Bigger ports with bigger cranes lowered 
the cost of handling each ship. Bigger containers—the 
20- foot box, shippers’ favorite in the early 1970s, was 
yielding to the 40- footer—cut down on crane move -
ments and reduced the time needed to turn a vessel 
around in port, making more efficient use of capital. A 
virtuous circle had developed: lower costs per container 
permitted lower rates, which drew more freight, which 
supported yet more investments in order to lower unit 
costs even more. If ever there was a business in which 
economies of scale mattered, container shipping was it.
Ship lines responded to the imperative of scale by ex-
tending their reach. The old breakbulk companies had 
often been content to serve a single route. In 1960, no 
fewer than twenty- eight carriers had sailed the North 
The Bigness Complex • 313
Atlantic, from the mighty Cunard Line to such one- ship 
minnows as American Independence Line and Irish Ship-
ping Limited. In the container age, minnows could not 
survive, and the truly big fish, companies such as Sea- 
Land, United States Lines, and Hapag- Lloyd, wanted to 
be in every major trade, either with their own ships or 
with an arrangement that allowed them to book space 
on someone else’s. The more ships they had, the more 
ports they served, the more widely they could spread the 
fixed costs of their operations. The more far- flung their 
services, the easier it would be to find loads to fill their 
containers and containers to fill their ships. The broader 
their networks, the more effectively they could cultivate 
relationships with multinational manufacturers whose 
needs for freight transportation were worldwide.3
Ocean carriers added 272 containerships to their  
fleets between 1976 and 1979. Four times during the 
1970s, worldwide container shipping capacity increased 
by more than 20 percent in a single year. Total cargo 
capacity aboard containerships, 1.9 million tons in 1970, 
reached 10 million in 1980, not counting the tonnage of 
vessels designed for a mix of containers and other freight.4
The quest for scale brought not just more ships but 
bigger ships. The Fairland, the first Sea- Land ship to 
cross the Atlantic in 1966, was only 469 feet long. The 
purpose- built containerships of the late 1960s were 
about 600 feet from stem to stern, and the fast vessels 
launched in 1972–73 were as much as 900 feet long and 
80 feet wide, with drafts of 40 feet. At that point, con-
tainership design seemed to be approaching its limits. 
The locks of the original Panama Canal, through which 
314 • Chapter 12
almost all traffic between Asia and the Atlantic Coast of 
North America had to travel, are 1,000 feet long and 110 
across, and bigger ships would not fit. The oil crisis, 
which caused so many financial problems for ship lines, 
unexpectedly brought relief. Shipowners decided to build 
slower vessels to save fuel: the average speed of newly 
delivered containerships dropped steadily from 25 knots 
in 1973 to 20 in 1984. Naval architects were no longer 
forced to design streamlined shapes to help achieve high 
speeds, and could concentrate instead on increasing pay-
loads. Without getting much longer, vessels got much 
larger. The ships entering service by 1978 could hold up 
to 3,500 20- foot containers—more than had entered all 
U.S. ports combined during an average week in 1968.
These Panamax vessels—the maximum size that could 
fit through the Panama Canal—could haul a container 
at much lower cost than could their predecessors. The 
construction cost itself was lower, relative to capacity: a 
vessel to carry 3,000 containers did not require twice as 
much steel or twice as large an engine as a vessel to carry 
1,500. Given the extent of automation on board the new 
vessels, a larger ship did not require a larger crew, so 
crew wages per container were much lower. Fuel con -
sumption did not increase proportionately with the ves-
sel’s size. By the 1980s, new ships holding the equivalent 
of 4,200 20- foot containers could move a ton of cargo 
at 40 percent less than could a ship built for 3,000 con-
tainers and at one- third the cost of a vessel designed for 
1,800.
5
And still the vessels grew. The economies of scale were 
so clear, and so large, that in 1988 ship lines began buy-
The Bigness Complex • 315
ing vessels too wide to fit through the Panama Canal. 
These so- called Post- Panamax ships needed deeper water 
and longer piers than many ports could offer. They were 
uneconomic to run on most of the world’s shipping lanes. 
They offered no flexibility, but they could do one thing 
very well. On a busy route between two large, deep har-
bors, such as Hong Kong and Los Angeles or Singapore 
and Rotterdam, they could sail back and forth, with a 
brief stop at each end, moving freight more cheaply than 
any other vehicles ever built. By the start of the twenty- 
first century, ship lines were ordering vessels able to carry 
10,000 20- foot containers, or 5,000 standard 40- footers, 
and even bigger ships were on the drawing boards.
As ships got bigger, ports got bigger. In 1970, the equiva-
lent of 292,000 loaded 20- foot containers passed across 
the piers at Newark and Elizabeth, far and away the 
world’s largest container complex. In 1980, the wharves 
around New York Harbor, including the new United 
States Lines terminal on Staten Island, handled seven 
times that many loaded boxes, even though New York’s 
share of all U.S. container traffic had declined. Container 
traffic from Britain to points outside Europe, almost all 
of which passed through either Felixstowe or Tilbury, 
more than trebled in a decade, despite Britain’s weak 
economy. Deep- sea ports from Rotterdam, Antwerp, and 
Hamburg to Hong Kong, Yokohama, and Kaohsiung, on 
Taiwan, more than doubled the number of boxes they 
handled in the late 1970s. More and more, the biggest 
ports traded largely with one another: in 1976, nearly 
one- quarter of all U.S. containerized foreign trade went 
316 • Chapter 12
through Kobe, Japan, or Rotterdam, in the Netherlands, 
and another quarter went through just five Asian or Eu-
ropean ports.
6
The ceaseless expansion of port capacity was driven 
by the same force as the ceaseless increase in ship ca-
pacity, the demand for lower cost per box. New ships 
sold for as much as $60 million apiece in the late 1970s, 
despite the depression in shipbuilding. To cover their 
mortgage payments, ship lines had to maximize the time 
that their vessels were under way, filled with revenue- 
generating cargo, and minimize the time spent in port. 
The equation was simple: the bigger the port, the bigger 
the vessels it could handle and the faster it could empty 
them, reload them, and send them back out to sea. Bigger 
ports were likely to have deeper berths, more and faster 
cranes, better technology to keep track of all the boxes, 
and better road and rail services to move freight in and 
out. The more boxes a port was equipped to handle, the 
lower its cost per box was likely to be. As one study 
concluded bluntly, “Size matters.”7
Size mattered, but a port’s location mattered less and 
less. Traditionally, ports had prospered from interrupting 
the flow of trade. Customs brokerage, wholesaling, and 
distribution had been concentrated in port cities, as they 
were in New York, because all inbound and outbound 
cargo made a stop there. A port usually had overwhelm-
ing financial and commercial links with the interior re-
gion that was its hinterland. Geographers, once upon a 
time, had designated inland points as “tributary” to a 
particular port.
There were no tributaries in container shipping. Con-
tainers turned ports into mere “load centers,” places 
The Bigness Complex • 317
through which large amounts of cargo flowed with 
hardly a break. Each ship line organized its operations 
around a small number of load centers to minimize the 
number of stops its costly vessels would make. Custom-
ers did not care where those load centers happened to be: 
an Illinois manufacturer shipping machinery to Korea 
was indifferent as to whether its goods went by truck to 
Long Beach or by rail to Seattle, much less whether they 
entered Korea at Busan or Incheon. The ship line would 
make those decisions at its discretion—and it would 
make them based entirely on which combination of ves-
sel operating costs, port charges, and ground transport 
rates would lead to the lowest total cost per box.
8
This new maritime geography brought decidedly non-
traditional trade patterns. Exports from southern France 
might move most cheaply through Le Havre, on the En-
glish Channel. Imports for Scotland might ride the train 
from southeastern England. Japanese cargo headed for 
San Francisco Bay might well be imported through Se-
attle rather than Oakland, with the ship line’s saving of 
one day’s steaming time in each direction outweighing 
the cost of putting some of the cargo on a train from 
Seattle to California. Port cities along the Gulf of Mexico 
increasingly did their European and Asian trade through 
Charleston or Los Angeles, because ship lines deemed 
sailing to the Gulf uneconomic. The Hampton Roads of 
Virginia displaced Baltimore as a major load center 
through no fault of Baltimore’s, but because a ship line 
serving Europe could make four more trips per year from 
Hampton Roads—and when a $60 million ship was in-
volved, those four trips could spell the difference be -
tween profit and loss.9
318 • Chapter 12
The local economic benefits of a successful port still 
were large. A metropolitan area with a port would have 
a concentration of jobs in trucking, railroading, and 
warehousing, would need customs brokers and freight 
forwarders, and would reap tax revenue from port- related 
businesses. Where those jobs happened to be, however, 
depended on commercial considerations much more than 
on geography. Ports such as Seattle, with small local mar-
kets, had a realistic hope of being major container gate-
ways, “reaping substantial economic benefits as a result,” 
one study argued. Ports such as Tokyo and London, with 
populous markets close at hand, were not guaranteed to 
prosper. With the ship lines calling the tune, ports were 
forced to compete for the carriers’ favor.10
Competition involved investment on a dizzying scale. 
The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank 
poured $1.3 billion into port projects in developing 
countries during the 1970s. American ports spent $2.3 
billion for container- handling facilities between 1973 
and 1989. Ship lines used their bargaining power to push 
the risks of building new berths, buying new cranes, and 
digging deeper channels on to government- run port 
agencies. The ports insisted that the ship lines sign leases, 
but leases often did not guarantee a flow of cargo. Ship 
lines could, and often did, move their load centers from 
one port to another as their strategies changed, making 
only minimal payments to the ports they left behind. In 
a single year, thirty ship lines shifted their service at 
North American ports, leaving some with a severe loss 
of traffic. Having the fanciest facilities did not guarantee 
success; Oakland spent a disproportionate share of its 
revenues for container terminals in the late 1970s but 
The Bigness Complex • 319
lost considerable market share to Long Beach nonethe-
less. In 1983, after yet more huge investments, an envi-
ronmental lawsuit brought a dredging project to a halt, 
and American President Lines responded by moving 
much of its traffic to Seattle. Seattle, in turn, lost out in 
1985, when Tacoma, a few miles south on Puget Sound, 
built a $44 million terminal and lured Sea- Land away.
11
Inevitably, much of the investment in port facilities went 
to waste. Baltimore’s new docks led to a surge of cargo 
in 1979 and 1980—but the port handled fewer contain-
ers in 2000 than it had two decades earlier. Taiwan’s 
expensive containerport at Kaohsiung was a roaring suc-
cess, but the government’s decision to build a port at 
Taichung as well was a costly mistake. San Diego was 
one of many ports to order high- priced container cranes 
that then found little use. Entire technologies, such as 
on- dock rail, proved to be sinkholes: ports that laid train 
tracks on the docks, so that cranes could transfer cargo 
directly from ships to waiting railcars, learned that the 
time required to move the train forward as the crane 
loaded each railcar delayed ships and reduced productiv-
ity. Many of the on- dock rail lines were abandoned, but 
the cost of failure was largely borne by the ports.
12
The increasing riskiness of the port business did not 
pass unnoticed. Government investment in ports had 
been crucial to the development of container shipping in 
the 1960s and 1970s. With the exceptions of Felixstowe 
and Hong Kong, every major containerport in that era 
was developed at public risk and expense. At the time, 
there had been no alternative: the undercapitalized ship 
lines and stevedoring companies could not possibly have 
320 • Chapter 12
financed port development on their own. As investment 
needs grew larger, public officials began to lose their en-
thusiasm for running ports. “The incremental costs are 
now staggering,” the head of Seattle’s port said in 1981. 
The possibility that a ship line’s departure or demise 
could leave a public agency to pay for idle cranes and 
silent container yards was too great for many govern -
ments to chance.13
British prime minister Margaret Thatcher broke the 
ice by selling off twenty- one ports to a private company 
in 1981. Governments in other countries followed suit. 
Malaysia leased its container terminal at Port Klang to a 
private group in 1986, and ports from Mexico to Korea 
to New Zealand were soon in private hands. The inves-
tors included not only stevedoring and transport compa-
nies, but also leading ocean carriers. Containership lines 
were by now huge businesses, able to raise the large 
amounts of capital that ports required. As port users, 
they had an interest in having facilities that could handle 
their ships quickly. Unlike government agencies, the pri-
vate port operators had no imperative to expand for the 
sake of local economic development; they could insist on 
long- term contracts, backed by banks or by collateral, to 
assure that they would recover whatever investments 
they made. Governments retreated to the role of land -
lords, renting out waterfront land to private companies. 
By the end of the twentieth century, nearly half the 
world’s trade in containers would be passing through 
privately controlled ports.14
In 1977, container shipping reached a landmark. Con -
tainerships were put into service between South Africa 
The Bigness Complex • 321
and Europe, the last big maritime route still handled by 
breakbulk ships. Containers were by no means universal; 
on many less trafficked routes, especially to Africa and 
Latin America, traditional ships still dominated. In com-
mercial terms, though, these were niche markets, not 
large opportunities. The major ocean routes had become 
the floating highways that Malcom McLean had envi -
sioned. Seventeen ships with a total capacity of 20,000 
20- foot containers sailed each week from the U.S. Pacific 
Coast to Japan in 1980. From northern Europe, 23 ships 
set sail weekly for Atlantic and Great Lakes ports in 
North America, and 8 more, with a capacity of more 
than 15,000 containers, left Europe for Japan. Even the 
long route between Australia and the U.S. East Coast 
had an average of 2.5 containerships in each direction 
each week, carrying Australian meat to America and 
manufactured goods the other way.15
In their endless quest to get bigger, ship lines set their 
sights on a new way of linking ports that they already 
served: sailing around the world.
Round- the- world service had been an idea hardly 
worth contemplating in the days of breakbulk shipping. 
With slow ships and long port calls, the 39,000- mile trip 
from New York across the North Atlantic, through the 
Straits of Gibraltar and the Suez Canal, calling at Singa-
pore and Hong Kong and Yokohama and Los Angeles 
and heading home through the Panama Canal, would 
easily have taken six months. Faster vessels and shorter 
port calls made a three- month voyage imaginable. In 
1978, the year after McLean’s departure, R. J. Reynolds 
ordered 12 diesel- powered vessels at a cost of $580 mil-
322 • Chapter 12
lion and promised that Sea- Land would soon launch a 
“new weekly round- the- world service.”16
The idea was not entirely insane. Most ship lines suf-
fered from highly imbalanced traffic patterns. Sea- Land, 
for example, was a major carrier in the North Pacific, but 
Japan’s huge trade surplus with the United States meant 
that it carried far more cargo eastbound than westbound. 
It had the reverse problem in the Middle East, where 
countries flush with petroleum revenues were importing 
large quantities of manufactured goods but had little 
containerized freight to export. A service sailing east -
bound around the world could help resolve this imbal-
ance by allowing ships to discharge full containers at 
Middle Eastern ports, take on empties that had been de-
livered on previous voyages, and carry them onward to 
Japan. On the way, the vessels might stop in Singapore 
and Hong Kong, where they would be met by smaller 
ships shuttling freight from developing economies, such 
as India and Thailand, that did not yet trade enough to 
justify a container route to Japan or the United States.
Yet round- the- world service was a risky venture. Traf-
fic flows between different pairs of ports were vastly dif-
ferent; a vessel that might be perfect for loads between 
New York and Rotterdam could easily be too large be-
tween Singapore and Hong Kong. Delays due to a storm, 
a dock strike, or a mechanical problem could play havoc 
with schedules intended to have a ship calling at each 
port on the same day each week. This was no minor 
problem: Israel’s Zim Line, which sailed from America’s 
Atlantic Coast through the Suez Canal to America’s West 
Coast—the closest thing to a round- the- world container 
service in 1980—arrived within one day of schedule on 
The Bigness Complex • 323
only 64 percent of its trips and was more than a full week 
late one trip in seven. If shippers were to decide that a 
standard point- to- point service was more likely to run 
on schedule than one circumnavigating the globe, round- 
the- world ships might find themselves hard- pressed to 
attract freight. In the face of these risks, Sea- Land gave 
up its plans to sail around the world.
Two of its major competitors did not. One was Ever-
green Marine. Evergreen, founded as a tramp company 
by the ambitious Taiwanese entrepreneur Chang Yung- 
fain 1968, had become a major operator across the Pa-
cific and on the Far East–Europe route, undercutting 
conference freight rates to gain traffic. In May 1982, Ev-
ergreen ordered 16 containerships from yards in Japan 
and Taiwan at a cost of $1 billion and announced that it 
would run round- the- world services heading both east 
and west. The vessels, originally planned to carry 2,240 
20- foot containers, were soon redesigned to hold 2,728. 
Chang called these vessels his “G- class” and named them 
accordingly: Ever Gifted, Ever Glory, Ever Gleamy. They 
would steam at 21 knots, fast enough that each of the 19 
ports of call would see an Evergreen ship in each direc-
tion every 10 days. Evergreen’s ships would circumnavi-
gate the world in 81 days east- bound, 82 days going 
west.17
The other competitor in the race around the world 
was an equally self- confident shipping magnate, Malcom 
McLean. In 1982, his United States Lines placed orders 
for 14 gigantic containerships. By building at Korea’s 
Daewoo shipyard, the company forfeited any rights to 
U.S. government construction subsidies but won the 
freedom to deploy the vessels where it chose, without 
324 • Chapter 12
government involvement. Each new ship could carry the 
equivalent of 4,482 20- foot boxes, half again as much as 
Evergreen’s G- class vessels. The ships were wide, flat, and 
utilitarian, designed—in the words of their architect, 
Charles Cushing—to look “much like a big shoe box 
above the water.” McLean’s strategy was different from 
Chang’s. His ships would circle the globe only in an east-
bound direction, and they would do so slowly. McLean 
had learned from his mistakes with the speedy SL- 7s, 
whose fuel bills ate up all their profits. The new ships 
were built for an era of expensive oil. They would con-
serve fuel by sailing at only 18 knots, taking longer than 
Evergreen’s vessels to sail around the world.
18
McLean dubbed his new vessels Econships, because 
their fuel economy, along with the scale economies cre-
ated by their enormous size, would produce the lowest 
cost per container of any ships anywhere. The ships 
alone cost $570 million. McLean’s new, publicly traded 
holding company, named, like its predecessor, McLean 
Industries, had no difficulty raising the money. The world 
was eager to invest with the founder of container ship-
ping as he turned United States Lines into a “global bus 
service.”
19
The profit potential of these new services was ques-
tionable from the start. Almost the entire container ship-
ping industry was struggling: Seatrain Lines went bank-
rupt in 1981; Delta Steamship and Moore- McCormack 
Lines collapsed into the arms of United States Lines in 
1982; Hapag- Lloyd sold its headquarters building for 
cash to repay creditors; Taiwan’s Orient Overseas (Inter-
national) Limited holding company was forced to re -
structure $2.7 billion of debt; and Sea Containers, which 
The Bigness Complex • 325
owned British ferry services as well as 15 containerships 
and a container leasing company, nearly went under. 
Matters grew even worse in 1984 and 1985, as Ever -
green and United States Lines began their round- the- 
world services. New shipping capacity flooded onto the 
market. The available space for containers in the North 
Pacific rose 20 percent between May 1983 and May 
1984, leaving ships from North America to Japan run-
ning almost half empty. Lloyd’s Shipping Economist re-
ported “widespread rate cutting actions by carriers in 
search of market share.”20
Nor was the service quite as expected. Each port call 
required not just a stop at the dock but a costly, time- 
wasting diversion from the round- the- world route. Un-
less stops were severely curtailed, voyages would become 
impractically long. As a result, most ports were con -
nected to the round- the- world services with feeder ships 
that transferred their containers at major load centers, 
lengthening total transit time for cargo. Evergreen’s 
globe- girdling ships eventually stopped visiting Britain 
altogether, using Le Havre, in France, as their regional 
load center and shuttling 200,000 containers per year to 
ports in England, Scotland, and Ireland. McLean’s Econ-
ships required too much depth for many ports, some -
times leaving cargo on the dock in order to depart on the 
high tide. Neither Evergreen nor United States Lines had 
faced the fact that their ships might not be the best way 
to move cargo; although shipping containers cross- 
country on double- stack trains cost more than sending 
them through the Panama Canal, American President 
Lines’ ship- rail service could get a container from Japan 
to New York in only 14 days, a transit time neither Ev-
326 • Chapter 12
ergreen nor United States Lines could come close to 
matching. On- time performance was a constant problem 
as well. With a ship sailing around the world, bad weather 
in the Bay of Biscay or a troublesome crane in Dubai 
could obliterate the schedules promised to customers at 
Yokohama and Long Beach.21
Disaster was not long in coming. Instead of rising 
from $28 to $50 a barrel, as McLean had expected, oil 
prices collapsed to $14 in 1985. United States Lines’ 
slow, fuel- conserving ships were suddenly the wrong ves-
sels for the market, and the oil sheikdoms of the Middle 
East could no longer afford the limitless quantities of 
imports that were supposed to keep the Econships filled 
with cargo. The competition was tougher, too: unlike the 
1970s, when one mismanaged breakbulk company after 
another collapsed before the onslaught of container 
shipping, the players in the 1980s were professionally 
managed firms with no inclination to surrender. After 
posting a $62 million profit in 1984, McLean Industries 
reported a $67 million loss in 1985. The company missed 
an interest payment in early 1986 as McLean struggled 
to restructure his loans. It was to no avail. In the first 
nine months of 1986, McLean Industries lost $237 mil-
lion on revenue of $854 million. Container terminals in 
Europe began demanding cash up front before allowing 
the Econships to load. Creditors tightened their terms. 
On November 24, staggering under $1.2 billion of debt, 
McLean Industries suspended all service and filed for 
bankruptcy.22
The collapse of United States Lines was, at the time, 
the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history. It was also one of 
the most tangled. A total of 52 ships were arrested at 
The Bigness Complex • 327
ports from Singapore to Greece. The seven U.S. banks 
that held the mortgages on the Econships scrambled to 
recover what they could from vessels that no other com-
pany wanted; 16 months later, the ships were sold to 
Sea- Land for 28 cents on the dollar. More than 10,000 
containers and 5,500 chassis were dumped back on Flex-
ivan Leasing, which had been renting them to United 
States Lines for a few dollars a day. United States Lines’ 
$12 million annual lease for its new container terminal 
on Staten Island was annulled, leaving the Port Authority 
of New York and New Jersey liable for $60 million of 
dredging and construction work. First Colony Farms 
passed into the hands of its bankers, much of it to end 
up as a wildlife refuge. Unsecured creditors, who were 
owed $260 million, came away with almost nothing. 
Malcom McLean’s shareholding, representing 88 per -
cent of McLean Industries’ common stock, was wiped 
out, and he and his son Malcom McLean Jr., a vice presi-
dent, were ejected from the management. Thousands of 
people lost their jobs.
23
“Malcom never got over the U.S. Lines bankruptcy,” 
a longtime associate said later. He went into seclusion, 
shunning journalists and avoiding public appearances. 
His failure followed him, the knowledge that he had 
hurt thousands of people a constant source of shame. 
Yet he still was a driven man. In 1991, five years after 
the failure of United States Lines, sheer boredom led 
him to launch yet another shipping company at the age 
of seventy- seven. Former Sea- Land executives, many of 
them now among the shipping industry’s leading lights, 
prevailed on him to return at least occasionally to pub -
lic view, to accept the awards and honors that were his 
328 • Chapter 12
due. On the morning of his funeral, May 30, 2001, con-
tainerships around the world sounded their whistles in 
his memory.24
Yet if the failure of United States Lines was a personal 
disaster for many, it was far from a catastrophe for the 
industry Malcom McLean had created. By 1986, the year 
of United States Lines’ collapse, ports, transportation 
companies, and shippers around the world had invested 
$76 billion in order to carry freight in containers. An -
other $130 billion of outlays was forecast by the end of 
the twentieth century, on even bigger ships, ports that 
could turn a vessel inside of twelve hours, cranes that 
could move more than one box per minute. Container 
shipping was becoming a very big business, and as it 
grew, the cost of moving a containerload of cargo was 
steadily coming down.25
CHAPTER 13
The Shippers’ Revenge
Disappointing as they were for investors, the first years 
of international container shipping introduced an en -
tirely new dynamism to the boring old business of mov-
ing freight. The decade- long rate war, as Karl Heinz 
Sager of the German carrier Hapag- Lloyd commented 
later, “entailed tremendous losses for shipowners, but it 
brought on the other hand the breakthrough of the ‘box’ 
with shippers.” The new container technology spread 
widely, and it would soon begin to penetrate deeply into 
the world economy.
1
The initial effects of the container were felt mainly 
within the narrow confines of the maritime industry,  
by ship lines, port agencies, and dockworkers. Carriers 
staggered under the enormous costs of the transition to 
container shipping, and some did not survive it. Ports 
literally had to rebuild themselves to handle containers 
in quantity, taking on entirely new roles developing and 
financing terminals of previously unimagined scale. 
Long shoremen almost everywhere lost their jobs in large 
numbers, although in many cases their unions resisted 
strongly enough to win compensation for acceding to the 
changes that would quickly reshape work on the docks.
330 • Chapter 13
The sweeping changes within the maritime world ini-
tially had very few wider consequences. Ocean transpor-
tation itself accounted for only a very small share of the 
world economy, and, except in dockside communities, 
longshore work was a tiny percentage of total employ-
ment. The true importance of the revolution in freight 
transportation would be found not in its effect on ship 
lines and dockworkers, but later, as the impact of con-
tainerization resonated among the hundreds of thou -
sands of factories and wholesalers and commodity trad-
ers and government agencies with goods to ship. For 
most shippers, except perhaps government agencies, the 
cost of transporting goods was decisive in determining 
what products they would make, where they would 
manufacture and sell them, and whether importing or 
exporting was worthwhile. The container would reshape 
the world economy only when it changed shippers’ costs 
in a significant way.
This did not happen quickly. As late as 1975, after 
containership lines had been crossing oceans on regular 
schedules for nearly a decade, a United Nations agency 
could declare that “few shippers have benefited from 
long- term reductions in liner transport costs.” A decade 
later, the situation would look very different.
2
The first years of international container shipping, up 
through the early 1970s, brought large reductions in ship 
lines’ costs. The most important was the saving in load-
ing and unloading vessels, which had been the greatest 
single expense in precontainer days. Capital costs, al -
though higher than for traditional ships, were not exor-
bitant, because old vessels refitted with cells to hold con-
The Shippers’ Revenge • 331
tainers made up most of the container fleet. Container 
berths at ports cost ten times as much to build as con-
ventional berths, but they could handle twenty times as 
much cargo per man- hour, so the cost per ton was lower. 
The early containerships were cheaper to operate than 
breakbulk ships on a per- ton basis, because each ship 
carried more freight. Adding it all up, the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) con-
cluded in 1970 that ship lines’ costs of moving freight on 
containerships were less than half those on conventional 
ships.
3
Shippers shared part of these initial cost reductions 
from containerization. The complexity of commodity- 
by- commodity rate structures makes it hard to estimate 
average rates, but anecdotal evidence suggests strongly 
that the introduction of international container shipping 
immediately brought lower rates than were available on 
breakbulk vessels. The rate decline, however, was prob-
ably less than justified by shipowners’ large savings, be-
cause the same conferences that set rates for containers 
also set rates for traditional shipping. Many conference 
members were carrying containers inefficiently on break-
bulk ships until their new containerships were built. They 
wanted to keep container rates close to breakbulk rates 
in order to protect their profits, and to slow the growth 
of containerization until their new vessels arrived.
The result was that the early rates for containers were 
based not on the cost of container shipping, but on the 
cost of breakbulk freight. If a container held mixed 
freight, each item was charged only slightly less than if it 
were moving in a breakbulk ship. Containers filled with 
a single product received discounts that were larger, but 
332 • Chapter 13
not generous. At the start of service from Europe to Aus-
tralia in 1969, for example, a Welsh refrigerator plant 
could save only 11 percent from breakbulk rates by ship-
ping full containers of its product, and almost nothing 
by sending small shipments that would travel in mixed 
containers along with other cargo. Full refrigerated con-
tainers of Australian meat went to Britain at a fairly mea-
ger 8.65 percent discount from the breakbulk rate.4
From the containership operators’ point of view, of-
fering lower rates for full containers than for mixed con-
tainers made perfect sense. A box fully loaded with a 
single commodity, sealed at the factory and not opened 
until it arrived at its final destination, was the most eco-
nomical sort of cargo to handle, whereas mixed freight 
had to be consolidated by a freight forwarder or a ship 
line, using expensive longshore labor. In the 1960s, how-
ever, manufacturers were not accustomed to doing busi-
ness by the containerload. Often, they would produce 
goods as orders came in and send out each order as it 
was finished. A 1968 study of 235 shipments of manu-
factured goods between North America and Western Eu-
rope found that 40 percent weighed less than one ton 
and 84 percent less than ten tons. These loads were too 
small to fill a single container and would not have quali-
fied for the cheapest rates.
5
Cost structures changed dramatically with the arrival 
of second- generation containerships starting in 1969. 
The new vessels had been designed with ease of loading 
and unloading foremost in their architects’ minds, and 
their cost for handling cargo was very low. Quite unlike 
either breakbulk ships or first- generation containerships, 
though, the second- generation ships came with obliga -
The Shippers’ Revenge • 333
tions payable regardless of the business situation. Inter-
est and principal on money borrowed to buy ships, chas-
sis, and containers loomed large. Instead of port fees that 
varied with time at the dock and the amount of cargo 
loaded or unloaded, there were long- term leases for 
wharves, cranes, and marshaling yards, with rent owed 
even if traffic was down. Transporting empty containers 
back across the ocean was a burden with no corollary in 
the breakbulk world, and it could be heavy: more than 
half the 100,000 containers passing through the Port of 
Antwerp in 1969 were empty. The computer systems to 
keep track of the containers and prepare loading plans 
for ships were a major new fixed cost.
6
The new ships’ larger sizes and higher speeds allowed 
them to move far more freight over the course of a year 
than earlier vessels. Ships purchased in the early 1970s 
by European lines sailing to the Far East, for example, 
had four times the cargo capacity of the breakbulk ships 
they replaced, and their higher speeds and faster port 
turnaround times let them make six round trips each 
year rather than 3⅓. Over the course of a year, each one 
of these new ships could carry six or seven times as much 
cargo as a conventional vessel. Profitability required that 
at least three- quarters of the container cells be filled; be-
yond that point, the fixed costs could be spread widely 
and the cost per container would be low. Profits thus 
depended not only on the number of vessels competing 
for cargo, but on the business cycle. A global recession 
would hit shipowners twice over: the lack of freight 
would cause their fixed cost per container to increase at 
the same time as it would weaken their ability to hold 
rates at profitable levels.7
334 • Chapter 13
Precisely such a lack of freight led to lower shipping 
rates in the early 1970s. Shipping machinery from south-
ern Germany to New York cost one- third less by con -
tainership than by breakbulk freight, a bank study found 
in 1971. From whiskey distillers in Scotland to apple 
growers in Australia, major users of international ship-
ping abandoned breakbulk freight as soon as regular 
container service was able to meet their needs. They had 
no reason to make this switch unless they found con -
tainer shipping advantageous. Shippers’ overwhelming 
choice—in economic terms, their “revealed prefer -
ence”—is very strong evidence that containerization on 
a trade route lowered the cost of shipping. The willing-
ness of ship lines to share revenues through arrange -
ments such as the North Atlantic Pool in 1971 indicates 
their desperation as freight rates tumbled.
8
Then came the oil crisis. The dramatic oil- price rises 
that began in 1972 and accelerated after the Yom Kippur 
War in October 1973 had a disproportionate impact on 
all transportation industries. The average price of crude 
oil on the world market rose from just over three dollars 
per barrel in 1972 to more than twelve dollars per barrel 
in 1974. Freight costs, whether by truck, train, or sea, 
rose relative to the cost of manufacturing.
The new containerships were hit especially hard. Their 
high speeds meant that they consumed two or three times 
as much fuel for a given amount of freight as the break-
bulk ships they replaced. This had not been a concern at 
the time the fuel- guzzling vessels had been designed; in 
the early 1970s, fuel accounted for only 10 to 15 percent 
of containerships’ operating costs. By 1974, though, fuel 
prices were a crushing burden, eventually to reach half 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 335
the total cost of running a ship. The liner shipping con-
ferences raised rates, slapped fuel surcharges and cur -
rency adjustment surcharges onto customers’ bills, and 
repeatedly raised the surcharges as fuel costs kept rising 
and the dollar kept falling. The cost of container ship -
ping on long- distance routes, on which fuel mattered 
most as a share of total costs, rose disproportionately. 
Importers and exporters responded by curtailing long- 
distance trade in manufactured goods much more sharply 
than short- distance trade. To freight users around the 
world, container shipping no longer seemed quite such a 
bargain.
9
Determining exactly what happened to the cost of ship-
ping from 1972 through the late 1970s poses an insur -
mountable challenge for the historian. Only short sea 
routes, such as those across the North Sea, had flat rates 
per container for most of that period. Elsewhere, charges 
were based not on the container but on the commodity 
inside. There is no reliable way to calculate an average 
cost, much less to track its change over time.
10
Three sources other than actual freight rates have 
been used to estimate the trends in shipping costs. One 
is the cost of leasing “tramp” ships, vessels that are char-
tered rather than providing regularly scheduled, or 
“liner,” service. The charter price per ton of tramp capac-
ity rose sharply, as was widely reported in shipping pub-
lications during the 1960s and 1970s. Most tramps, 
however, carried grain or other bulk cargo rather than 
manufactured goods, so the rental cost sheds little light 
on the price of container shipping. As container shipping 
gained importance, tramps were increasingly relegated 
336 • Chapter 13
to carrying low- value freight that could not efficiently be 
containerized, making tramp prices of little relevance to 
the cost of containerized freight.
11
A second main source of freight- cost data is the Liner 
Index compiled by the German Ministry of Transport. 
This shows that freight rates flattened out in 1966, as 
container shipping arrived, but then rose steeply, trebling 
between 1969 and 1981. The Liner Index, though, is 
highly problematic as a gauge of global transport costs. 
It tracked rates on cargoes passing through ports in 
northern Germany, the Netherlands, and northern Bel -
gium, not worldwide, and its coverage included a large 
proportion of noncontainer shipping. Changes in the ex-
change rate of the German mark seem to have had a 
huge influence on the index’s movements. It took four 
German marks to buy one U.S. dollar in 1966, three in 
1972, and only two by 1978. For shippers who did busi-
ness in dollars, ocean freight rates as measured by the 
Liner Index rose well below the rate of inflation during 
the 1970s.
12
The third alternative is the estimate of standardized 
charter rates for containerships published by Hamburg 
ship broker Wilhelm A. N. Hansen starting in 1977. 
Hansen’s measure, unlike the Liner Index, shows prices 
falling in 1978 and 1979. However, it is drawn from 
charters of very small containerships, the kind most 
likely to be available for charter. It is not clear whether 
it accurately reflects rates charged by operators with 
larger, more efficient vessels.13
The technical problems involved in measuring ship -
ping rates during the 1960s and 1970s are so great that 
reliable measures of the container’s price impact are un-
The Shippers’ Revenge • 337
likely to be developed. International shipping rates were 
often set in U.S. dollars, and dramatic changes in ex -
change rates changed shipping costs for companies in 
many countries independent of changes in technology. 
Many conferences offered discounts of as much as 20 
percent to shippers that signed “loyalty agreements” 
promising to use only conference members’ ships, so the 
published conference rates were not necessarily the rates 
that important shippers paid. Many large shippers de -
manded, and received, under- the- table rebates from ship 
lines in return for paying the published rate; although 
rebates on routes to the United States were illegal—Sea- 
Land was fined $4 million in 1977 for distributing $19 
million in secret payments to customers between 1971 
and 1975—the practice was common elsewhere. Re -
bates, of course, made the actual prices that shippers 
paid much lower than the prices ship lines claimed to 
charge.14
Complicating matters even further is the fact that tra-
ditional breakbulk ships remained in service long after 
container shipping arrived. Breakbulk ships transported 
more of the United States’ general- cargo trade than did 
containerships until 1973. They remained important on 
routes to developing countries in Africa and Latin Amer-
ica well into the 1980s, because in many trades the flow 
of cargo was too small to justify the capital outlay for 
dedicated containerships and ports. Any measure of 
overall ocean freight costs during the first decade of in-
ternational container shipping thus is capturing a large 
amount of breakbulk shipping. It is also capturing infla-
tion. Consumer prices in every industrial country more 
than doubled during the 1970s, and it would be an ex-
338 • Chapter 13
traordinary achievement indeed if containerization actu-
ally brought the nominal cost of shipping down.15
Trying to compute the extent to which containeriza-
tion changed “average” maritime rates for shippers keep-
ing their accounts in different currencies and moving a 
wide variety of goods under hundreds of conference rate 
structures is an exercise in futility. On balance, the evi-
dence suggests strongly that the cost of shipping a ton of 
international freight began to decline as containerization 
became important around 1968 or 1969, and that it fell 
through 1972 or 1973. As fuel prices rose steeply, freight 
costs reversed direction, rising until 1976 or 1977. Rates 
on American- flag vessels other than tankers, overwhelm-
ingly general- cargo ships, show a similar trend, with ship 
lines’ revenues falling relative to the value of their cargo 
until the oil crisis brought the rate cutting to a temporary 
end in 1975.16
And what if container shipping had not taken the 
transportation world by storm? Dockers’ pay soared 
during the 1970s. Productivity improvements in break-
bulk shipping were minimal. The labor- intensive task of 
loading a breakbulk ship would have been far costlier in 
1976 than it was a decade earlier. Even at the peak of oil 
prices in 1976, when fuel surcharges were pushing ocean 
freight rates sky- high, very few shippers seem to have 
entertained the thought of going back to breakbulk 
shipping.17
Ocean freight, of course, is not the only cost involved 
in transporting imports and exports. The total freight bill 
includes not just ship rates, but land transportation to 
and from the ports; packaging; storage and other port 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 339
charges; damage and insurance; and the cost of money 
tied up in goods that are in transit. In the days of break-
bulk shipping, the relative importance of these various 
costs depended heavily on the details of the particular 
shipment. Moving a load of packaging material from the 
United States to Western Europe in 1968, for example, 
yielded $381 per ton for the ship line and only $34 for 
truckers or railroads. Moving a load of auto parts with 
long land shipments at both ends, by contrast, cost $152 
per ton for land freight and only $20 for ocean freight. 
For the packaging materials, a change in ocean freight 
rates would have made a dramatic change in the total 
freight bill, but for the auto parts it would barely have 
mattered.
18
The containerization of ocean shipping initially did 
not reduce the costs on land. In many countries, rates for 
truck lines and railroads were based on the commodity 
and the distance, just like ocean freight rates. Regula -
tions in the United States barred ship lines even from 
quoting a single through rate to an inland destination, 
much less negotiating special discounts for land trans -
portation on behalf of their customers. Moving a con -
tainer of televisions from Hiroshima to Chicago thus 
required the exporter to pay the standard Japanese truck 
rate for televisions, plus the appropriate ocean freight 
rate, plus the domestic U.S. truck or rail rate for elec -
tronic products, plus a payment to a freight forwarder to 
make all the arrangements. Land freight rates moved 
sharply higher during the 1970s, driven by increased fuel 
prices and higher wages. Shippers exporting to the United 
States increasingly favored routes that involved longer 
340 • Chapter 13
ocean voyages and shorter land hauls, an indication that 
land transport costs were increasing relative to the cost 
of ocean freight.
19
Businesses near ports ignored by container operators 
may have ended up with disproportionately higher ship-
ping costs in the 1970s, because their goods now had to 
move much longer distances over land. Seventeen differ-
ent ports had handled New Zealand’s international trade 
in breakbulk days, but containers were shipped through 
only four, leaving meat or wool processors to pay for 
getting their products to Auckland or Wellington. The 
same happened to industrial companies around Man -
chester; Britain’s fifth- largest port fell into disuse in the 
1970s as containerships avoided the time- consuming trip 
up the thirty- six- mile canal from the sea, and local cus-
tomers had to cover the land costs of trading through 
Liverpool or Felixstowe. Manufacturers in northern New 
England faced the added cost of trucking their exports to 
New York after their traditional port, Boston, ended up 
with only occasional visits from containerships.
20
Many nonfreight costs undoubtedly fell with the 
growth of container shipping. Packing full containers at 
the factory eliminated the need for custom- made wooden 
crates to protect merchandise from theft or damage. The 
container itself served as a mobile warehouse, so the tra-
ditional costs of storage in transit warehouses fell away. 
Cargo theft dropped sharply, and claims of damage to 
goods in transit fell by up to 95 percent; after insurers 
were persuaded that container shipping in fact had fewer 
property losses, premiums fell by up to 30 percent. Faster 
ships and reductions in the time needed to load and un-
The Shippers’ Revenge • 341
load vessels at ports resulted in lower costs for inventory 
in shipment.21
As Malcom McLean had understood back in 1955, it 
is the sum of these costs, not just the published rate of a 
ship line or railroad, that matters to shippers. Ideally, we 
would like to trace the door- to- door cost of the same 
shipment over time, so that we could measure the change 
as containerized transportation took hold. With similar 
information on a hundred different consumer products 
and industrial goods, we might be able to assemble a 
reasonable index of freight costs. This task, alas, is be-
yond even the most intrepid investigator. Data on door- 
to- door shipping costs were not compiled in 1965, and 
they do not exist today.
What we do know is that the overall cost of shipping 
goods internationally remained relatively high through 
the mid- 1970s, even with containerization. One 1976 
shipment studied in detail by the Maritime Administra-
tion, involving $25,000 worth of wheel rims shipped 
from Lansing, Michigan, to Paris, France, incurred 
$5,637 of freight costs—22.6 percent of the value of the 
cargo. The bill included $3,600 for ocean freight from 
Detroit to Le Havre, more than $600 in trucking costs, 
and over $1,300 in fees and insurance costs. With the 7 
percent French import tariff added on, the wheel rims 
cost one- third more in France than in Michigan.22
At some point in the late 1970s, the trend line seems to 
have begun to change. Although fuel costs continued to 
rise, the real cost of shipping goods internationally 
started to fall rapidly.23
342 • Chapter 13
What happened to make shipping cheaper? And why 
did it start to happen around 1977 rather than with the 
onset of international container shipping a decade ear -
lier? The answers have to do with a group that has re-
ceived little attention in these pages: shippers. Contain-
erization required the buyers of transportation to learn 
a whole new way of thinking about managing their 
freight costs. As they became more knowledgeable, more 
sophisticated, and more organized, they began to drive 
down the cost of shipping.
Shippers were not a major force in the days of break-
bulk freight. Many governments frowned upon rate 
competition, supporting rate fixing by the liner confer -
ences and, on some routes, prohibiting low- rate indepen-
dent carriers altogether. Even where governments al -
lowed nonconference lines to compete, relatively few 
did, because there often was not enough freight: ship -
pers typically agreed to pledge all of their freight on a 
route to conference members in return for “loyalty” 
discounts—a pledge that strengthened the conference by 
making it harder for nonconference intruders to get busi-
ness. Shippers, ship lines, and governments all thought of 
ocean ship lines in much the same way they thought of 
trucking companies and railroads, as providers of a pub-
lic service entitled to raise their rates whenever their 
costs went up. “Our future depends on having strong 
conferences supported by strong commercial shipper 
bodies,” an executive of a British ship line said in 1974—
as if the interests of ship lines and their customers were 
one and the same.
24
The huge capital requirements of container shipping 
left fewer ship lines on each route, strengthening the con-
The Shippers’ Revenge • 343
ferences and tilting the playing field against shippers. The 
1971 pooling agreement on the North Atlantic, to take 
the most extreme example, essentially combined the ef-
forts of fifteen lines that had once been competitors. On 
the Europe–Australia route, the thirteen companies that 
sailed between Europe and Australia in 1967 had com-
bined into seven by 1972. As these new groupings began 
to curb competition, shippers reacted by working to -
gether more closely. By 1976, private- sector shippers’ 
councils were active in thirty- five countries.25
It was in Australia, where farmers were almost totally 
dependent on exports, that shippers began to flex their 
muscles. In 1971, four groups representing sheep farmers 
and wool buyers formed a joint organization to oppose 
rises in freight rates. A year later, rubber traders in Sin-
gapore responded to conference surcharges by finding a 
nonconference carrier to move their product to Europe 
for 40 percent less. Australian dairy producers signed 
with a nonconference carrier to save 10 percent on 
freight rates to Japan. By 1973, shippers’ power on the 
East Asia–Europe route was substantial enough that the 
conference was forced to bargain, and the Malaysian 
Palm Oil Producers Association won an unprecedented 
two- year rate freeze. “Increases in the liner freight rates 
met considerable opposition from shippers in certain 
trades,” UNCTAD reported in 1974. In 1975, the Aus-
tralian Meat Board bargained for unusually deep rate 
reductions in return for giving four ship lines all its meat 
shipments to the U.S. East Coast.
26
Shipper organizations had no legal status in the United 
States, and shippers were reluctant to negotiate jointly 
lest they be accused of violating antitrust law. The big-
344 • Chapter 13
gest shippers, however, began to exert influence on their 
own, even as they changed the way they worked in order 
to take advantage of the container.
27
In the early days of containerization, users dealt with 
shipping much as they had in breakbulk days. Traffic 
management was decentralized, with each plant or ware-
house making its own arrangements. If the company as 
a whole could have saved money by sending fully loaded 
40- foot containers to individual customers, well, that 
was not the concern of the freight managers at individual 
locations, whose job was mainly to get the products out 
the door. Most shippers favored 20- foot maritime con-
tainers, which cost more per ton to ship, because they 
could not coordinate production of various orders well 
enough to fill a 40- foot box. The biggest shipper of all, 
the U.S. military, divided responsibilities between one 
agency that handled land shipping and another that dealt 
with sea freight, often paying extra because it had se -
lected the wrong size container for a given load.28
In industry, the traffic department, housed in the back 
of the plant near the loading dock, would be given what-
ever the manufacturing department produced, with in -
structions to ship it. A tariff clerk, his desk piled high 
with the freight classification guidelines of various liner 
conferences, trucking conferences, and railroads, would 
try to describe the cargo in whatever way brought the 
lowest rate. An export manager would then call ship 
lines to select a vessel, balancing the desire for fast deliv-
ery with the need to keep from becoming too dependent 
on a particular carrier. With decentralized organizations 
and fairly primitive computer systems, even large, rela-
tively sophisticated multinational corporations could 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 345
end up paying dramatically different prices for the same 
type of cargo, depending on what the tariff clerk and  
the export manager could accomplish. “In some cases 
we’d pay $1,600 for a 40- foot container in the North 
Atlantic, and in other cases we’d be paying $8,000 for 
the same container,” recalled a former chemical- industry 
executive.
29
Big shippers typically signed dozens of loyalty agree -
ments covering different routes, obtaining discounts in 
return for commitments to ship all of their freight with 
conference members, and then dealt with hundreds of 
individual conference carriers. The result, often enough, 
was unsatisfactory. A loyalty agreement did not guaran-
tee space on a ship; if the manufacturer had cargo to 
ship to India but no space was available on a conference 
member’s vessel, the cargo had to wait until a confer -
ence ship had room. Sending the freight on an indepen-
dent liner or a tramp ship violated the contract and 
would expose the shipper to a heavy fine from the con -
ference. If the only available conference vessel was mak-
ing multiple port calls before heading overseas, the 
cargo would be delayed while the vessel loaded other 
freight in each port. Managing relationships with ship 
lines and doling out cargo were administrative night -
mares for major manufacturers, requiring large num -
bers of staff.30
As ship lines combined their forces to gain market 
power, manufacturers responded aggressively. The first 
step was to look beyond the conferences.
Nonconference carriers had always played a role in 
the major trades, but a small one. The biggest shippers 
rarely used them. Independents, as the nonconference 
346 • Chapter 13
lines were known, offered discounts of 10 to 20 percent 
from conference rates, but most of them were too small 
to provide frequent service on the routes they plied. If a 
shipper used an independent carrier and then required 
service that the independent could not provide, it would 
end up paying a conference line more than if it had signed 
an agreement with the conference in the first place. Ship-
pers that had a highly predictable flow of cargo could 
handle that risk. For manufacturers, who might have a 
sudden need to ship an unanticipated order, sticking with 
the large conference carriers, even at higher cost, was the 
safer strategy.
31
When containers came on the scene, the economics of 
container shipping were thought to work against inde -
pendent lines. The costs were so high that small opera-
tors could not enter the business on a whim. Establishing 
a viable container operation in the United States–Asia 
trade, one economist estimated in 1978, would require 
$374 million to buy five ships plus containers, chassis, 
and cranes. Common sense suggested that anyone put-
ting up that much money would join conferences in 
hopes of keeping rates high enough to recover costs. But 
in the second half of the 1970s, it turned out that the 
barriers to entry were not as high as they seemed. Ship-
building costs, which had risen 400 percent from the end 
of 1970 through the end of 1975, began to fall as the 
collapse of the oil tanker market left shipyards bereft of 
orders. Builders slashed prices and extended loans just to 
keep their yards at work. Bargains on new vessels al -
lowed traditional ship lines such as Maersk of Denmark 
and Evergreen Marine of Taiwan to elbow their way into 
container shipping. Maersk and Evergreen operated as 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 347
independents on most routes, with rates far below what 
the conferences charged. As they added ships, they be -
came credible competitors, drawing shippers that had 
been wedded to the conferences. Neither company had 
owned a containership before 1973. By 1981, Maersk’s 
twenty- five ships made it the world’s third- largest con-
tainership operator, while Evergreen, with fifteen vessels, 
ranked eighth.
32
Other independent lines proliferated, particularly in 
the Pacific. Taiwan’s Orient Overseas, owned by ship -
ping magnate C. Y. Tung, became the first independent 
carrier to run containerships between Asia and New 
York in 1972, charging 10 to 15 percent less than the 
conference. Korea Shipping Corp., another nonconfer -
ence operator, laid out $88 million for eight container -
ships in 1973. Far Eastern Shipping Company, a Russian 
independent, sent two containerships a month from Yo-
kohama to Long Beach and Oakland. Conference tariff 
books turned into comic books as shippers deserted the 
conference carriers in droves. The shift to flat per- 
container rates in the late 1970s revealed the severe ero-
sion of conference bargaining power in a way not pos-
sible when each commodity was charged a different rate. 
The conference rate for shipping a 20- foot container 
from Felixstowe to Hong Kong fell from $3,645 in 1980 
to $2,136 just three years later, and was lower in 1988 
than at the start of the decade. The cost of shipping a 
40- foot box from Europe to New York, $2,000 in the 
middle of 1979, was below $1,000 by the summer of 
1980. By January 1981, so many nonconference ships 
were competing to carry trade from Manila that the Phil-
ippines–North America conference collapsed.33
348 • Chapter 13
The second important result of shippers’ new power 
in the 1970s, along with their willingness to defy the 
shipping cartels, was their embrace of an idea that had 
been a heresy: the deregulation of transportation.
Trucking was tightly regulated almost everywhere in 
the early 1970s, with the notable exception of Australia. 
Most railroads were state- owned, damping any competi-
tive instincts. So long as political power rested with the 
transportation companies and their unions, rather than 
their customers, the regulatory structure stood strong. If 
its collapse can be dated to a single event, it was the 
bankruptcy of the Penn Central, the largest railroad in 
the United States, in June 1970. The Penn Central’s fail-
ure, followed in short order by a half dozen other rail 
bankruptcies, drew attention to the regulations that kept 
the railroads from adapting to truck competition. The 
costly and controversial government rescue program al-
tered the political equation, and Republicans and Demo-
crats alike began calling for reductions in regulation. In 
November 1975, President Gerald Ford proposed elimi-
nating much of the Interstate Commerce Commission’s 
authority over interstate trucking. The following year, 
Congress took the first steps to ease regulation of 
railroads.34
An intense national debate ensued. On one side, along 
with railroads wanting more flexibility to compete with 
truckers, were shippers and consumer advocates who 
argued that deregulation would reduce costs. Some 
trucking companies, especially those that handled smaller 
shipments, were eager to get rid of regulations. On the 
other side, many companies that handled full truckloads 
of freight were bitterly opposed to changes that would 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 349
encourage partial truckloads, and the unions represent-
ing railroad workers and truck drivers fought changes 
that would weaken union power and eliminate union 
jobs. The regulators, who were easing regulations slowly 
and gradually, warned Congress against haste. “Certain 
shippers command substantial and sometimes over -
whelmingly superior bargaining power,” the ICC’s chair-
man cautioned, asserting the need for the government to 
keep control in order to protect truckers and railroads 
from their customers.35
In the midst of this heated campaign, the container 
became a poster child for the inefficiency caused by out-
dated regulation.
The basic concept of the container was that cargo 
could move seamlessly among trains, trucks, and ships. 
Two decades after Malcom McLean’s first containership, 
though, container shipping was anything but seamless. 
In principle, a truck line or a railroad could offer an 
exporter a “through rate” between St. Louis and Spain, 
but the through rate was simply the published truck or 
rail rate for that product from St. Louis to a port, plus 
the published ship rate for that commodity across the 
Atlantic. Domestically, truckers did not much like carry-
ing containers long distances from the ports because they 
might well have to haul them back empty; domestic ship-
pers preferred to use conventional trailers, which did not 
detach from their chassis, rather than detachable con -
tainers. Railroads did have a business carrying domestic 
“piggyback” truck trailers on flatcars, but the service was 
attractive only for relatively long trips; sending a trailer 
piggyback the four hundred miles from Minneapolis  
to Chicago took eighteen to twenty- two hours, against 
350 • Chapter 13
eight hours or so in a truck. Piggyback was often no 
bargain, either. The railroads set rates high in the forlorn 
hope that shippers would use boxcars instead, so putting 
a trailer on a train often cost more than taking it over the 
road.
36
The railroads were no more aggressive when it came 
to containers, without the truck chassis and wheels. 
When Sea- Land and the railroads had discussed a trans-
continental container service back in 1967, the railroads 
asked for three times the price that the ship line was 
willing to pay, and talks went no further. They tried again 
in 1972 with a service called “minibridge,” in which a 
ship line and railroads would join forces to carry a con-
tainer from, say, Tokyo to New York via the Port of Oak-
land. The carriers would agree on a single rate for the 
entire trip, file it with both the Interstate Commerce 
Commission (the rail regulator) and the Federal Mari -
time Commission (the ship regulator), and decide how to 
split up the money. Ship lines claimed that minibridge cut 
costs by eliminating the long, fuel- consuming voyage 
through the Panama Canal. The real advantage, less pub-
licized, was that loading and unloading ships was much 
cheaper in Pacific Coast ports than on the East Coast: 
almost no one bothered to export from California to 
Europe by minibridge through New York. The railroads 
were so uninterested in the concept that they could not 
even be bothered to design equipment more efficient 
than their standard flatcars. Shippers often saw little sav-
ing. Sending televisions from Japan to New York by 
mini- bridge took several days less than by all- water ser-
vice but was no less expensive. Sending synthetic rubber 
from Texas to Japan, a U.S. government study found in 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 351
1978, cost three times as much by mini- bridge through 
Los Angeles as when the rubber was trucked to Houston 
and loaded on a ship.
37
Deregulation changed everything. In two separate 
laws passed in 1980, Congress freed interstate truckers 
to carry almost anything almost anywhere at whatever 
rates they could negotiate. The ICC lost its role approv-
ing rail rates, except for a few commodities such as coal 
and chemicals. Trucks and railcars that had often been 
forced to return empty were able to get cargo for back-
hauls. Another definitive break from the past proved 
critical to driving down the cost of international ship -
ping. For the first time, railroads and their customers 
could negotiate long- term contracts setting rates and 
terms of service. The long- standing principle that all cus-
tomers should pay the same price to transport the same 
product gave way to a system that yielded huge discounts 
for the biggest customers. Within five years, 41,021 con-
tracts between railroads and shippers were filed with the 
ICC. Freight transportation within the United States was 
reshaped dramatically. Costs fell so steeply that by 1988, 
U.S. shippers—and, ultimately, U.S. consumers—saved 
nearly one- sixth of their total land freight bill.38
Perhaps no part of the freight industry was altered 
more than container shipping. The ability to sign long- 
term contracts gave railroads an incentive to develop a 
business that had languished for two decades, with as -
surance that their investment would not go to waste. 
Equipment manufacturers went back to work on low- 
slung railcars designed for fast loading of containers 
stacked two- high, the sort of cars Malcom McLean had 
tried—and failed—to convince railroads to use back in 
352 • Chapter 13
1967. Deregulation meant that those doublestack cars 
could be used to haul international containers in one 
direction and containers filled with domestic freight in 
the other—impractical before 1980—so the interna -
tional shipment did not have to bear the cost of returning 
an empty container to the port.
In July 1983, American President Lines sponsored the 
first experimental train composed only of the new 
double- stack cars. Within months, ship lines and rail -
roads had negotiated ten- year contracts under which 
dedicated double- stack container trains would speed im-
ports from Seattle, Oakland, and Long Beach directly to 
specially designed freight yards in the Midwest. Days 
were shaved off the delivery time. The rates, set by nego-
tiation rather than regulation, were far lower than before 
and were designed to fall further as volumes rose. On 
average, it cost four cents to ship one ton of container -
ized freight one mile by rail in 1982. Adjusted for infla-
tion, that cost dropped 40 percent over the next six years. 
Rail rates fell so steeply that by 1987, more than one- 
third of the containers headed from Asia to the U.S. East 
Coast crossed the United States by rail rather than mak-
ing the voyage entirely by sea. A major obstacle to inter-
national trade had given way.
39
With U.S. trucks and trains deregulated, shipper interests 
turned their attention to the maritime industry. Once 
more, they won a sweeping victory. The Shipping Act of 
1984 rewrote the rules governing international shipping 
through U.S. ports. Shippers could now sign long- term 
contracts with ship lines. In return for guaranteeing a 
minimum amount of cargo, a shipper could negotiate a 
The Shippers’ Revenge • 353
low rate and specific terms of service, such as the fre -
quency of ships. These “service contracts” had to be 
made public, so other shippers with similar freight could 
demand the same deal. While conferences were still per-
mitted to set rates, individual conference members were 
free to depart from conference rates whenever they 
wished, so long as they served public notice.
Shippers’ newfound power put intense downward 
pressure on freight rates. The official rates published by 
railroads and ship lines did not fall; if the improbable 
figures in Lloyd’s Shipping Economist are to be believed, 
the conference tariff for a 20- foot container from Britain 
to New York doubled between 1980 and 1988. But the 
official rates meant nothing. A better indication of true 
market conditions comes from the rates bid for U.S. mili-
tary freight. The military market was open only to U.S.- 
flag ship lines, which submitted sealed bids every six 
months to carry general cargo in containers at least 32 
feet long. Ship lines were not obligated to bid, so what-
ever bids were submitted were presumably above the 
rates the carriers thought they could earn from commer-
cial cargo. In October 1979, the low bidders offered 
$40.94 to carry 40 cubic feet of cargo either way across 
the Pacific. By 1986, the transpacific rates had collapsed 
to $2.39 westbound, and $15.89 from Asia to the U.S. 
West Coast. Even as U.S. producer prices were rising by 
nearly one- third between 1979 and 1986, maritime 
freight rates were plummeting.40
After the middle of the 1970s, the growth of noncon-
ference ship lines and the ability of shippers to negotiate 
rates made official tariff schedules useless as indicators 
of what exporters and importers were paying to ship 
354 • Chapter 13
their goods. “The rates actually charged vary widely and 
often deviate substantially from published tariffs,” the 
World Bank confirmed. The New York Times was less 
diplomatic, reporting in 1986 that “the shipping world 
has been turned upside down by five catastrophic years 
of tumbling freight rates, rising costs, and sinking values 
of used ships.” When American President Lines studied 
the matter a few years later, it concluded that freight 
rates from Asia to North America had fallen 40 to 60 
percent because of the container. Between 1966 and 
1990, economists Daniel M. Bernhofen, Zouheir El- 
Sahli, and Richard Kneller reported in 2013, the con -
tainer was more than twice as important in increasing 
the flow of international trade among the wealthy coun-
tries as governments’ efforts to eliminate formal trade 
barriers. The box made the world economy much, much 
bigger.
41
CHAPTER 14
Just in Time
Barbie was conceived as the all- American girl. In truth, 
she never was: at her inception, in 1959, Mattel Corp. 
arranged to make her at a factory in Japan. A few years 
later it added a plant in Taiwan, along with a large cadre 
of Taiwanese women who sewed Barbie’s clothes in their 
homes. By the middle of the 1990s, Barbie’s citizenship 
had become even less distinct. Workers in China pro -
duced her statuesque figure, using molds from the United 
States and other machines from Japan and Europe. Her 
nylon hair was Japanese, the plastic in her body from 
Taiwan, the pigments American, the cotton clothing 
from China. Barbie, simple girl though she is, had devel-
oped her very own global supply chain.
1
Supply chains like Barbie’s are a direct result of the 
changes wrought by the rise of container shipping. They 
were unheard- of back in 1956, when Malcom McLean 
placed his first containers on board the Ideal- X, and in 
1976, when high oil prices brought sky- high freight costs 
that stifled the flow of world trade. Until then, vertical 
integration was the norm in manufacturing: a company 
would obtain raw materials, sometimes from its own 
mines or oil wells; move them to its factories, sometimes 
356 • Chapter 14
with its own trucks or ships or railroad; and put them 
through a series of processes to turn them into finished 
products. As freight costs plummeted starting in the late 
1970s and as the rapid exchange of cargo from one 
transportation carrier to another became routine, manu-
facturers discovered that they no longer needed to do 
everything themselves. They could contract with other 
companies for raw materials and components, locking in 
supplies, and then sign transportation contracts to assure 
that their inputs would arrive when needed. Integrated 
production yielded to disintegrated production. Each 
supplier, specializing in a narrow range of products, 
could take advantage of the latest technological develop-
ments in its industry and gain economies of scale in its 
particular product lines. Low transport costs helped 
make it economically sensible for a factory in China to 
produce Barbie dolls with Japanese hair, Taiwanese plas-
tics, and American colorants, and ship them off to eager 
girls all over the world.
These possibilities first drew notice in the early 1980s, 
when the world discovered just- in- time manufacturing. 
“Just- in- time,” a concept originated by Toyota Motor 
Company in Japan, involves raising quality and effi -
ciency by eliminating large inventories. Rather than 
making most of its own components, as competitors did, 
Toyota signed long- term contracts with outside suppli-
ers. The suppliers were intimately involved with Toyota, 
helping design its products and knowing the details of its 
production plans. They were required to adopt strict 
quality standards, with very low rates of error, so that 
Toyota would not need to test the components before 
using them. The suppliers agreed to make their goods in 
Just in Time • 357
small batches, as required for Toyota’s assembly lines, 
and to deliver them within very narrow time windows 
for immediate use—hence the name, just- in- time. Keep-
ing inventory to a minimum brought discipline to the 
entire manufacturing process. With few components in 
stock, there was little margin for error, forcing every firm 
in the supply chain to perform as required.2
The wonders of just- in- time were unmentioned out-
side Japan before 1981. In 1984, as Toyota agreed to 
assemble cars at a General Motors plant in California, 
U.S. business publications ran thirty- four articles on just- 
in- time. In 1986, there were eighty- one, and companies 
around the world were seeking to emulate Toyota’s high- 
profile success. In the United States, two- fifths of the For-
tune 500 manufacturers had started just- in- time pro -
grams by 1987. Overwhelmingly, these companies found 
that just- in- time required them to deal with transporta-
tion in a very different way. No more would manufactur-
ers offer a load or two to some truck line’s hungry sales-
man. Now, they wanted large- scale relationships with a 
much smaller number of carriers able to meet stringent 
requirements for on- time delivery. Customers demanded 
written contracts that imposed penalties for delays. Even 
shipments from another continent were expected to ar -
rive on schedule. Railroads, ship lines, and truck lines 
with large route networks and sophisticated cargo- 
tracking systems had the edge.3
Before the 1980s, “logistics” was a military term. By 
1985, logistics management—the task of scheduling pro-
duction, storage, transportation, and delivery—had be-
come a routine business function, and not just for manu-
facturers. Retailers discovered that they could manage 
358 • Chapter 14
their own supply chains, cutting out the wholesalers that 
had stood between manufacturers and consumers. With 
modern communications and container shipping, the re-
tailer could design its own shirts and transmit the designs 
to a factory in Thailand, which used local labor to com-
bine Chinese fabric made from American cotton, Malay-
sian buttons made from Taiwanese plastics, Japanese 
zippers, and decorations embroidered in Indonesia. The 
finished order, loaded into a 40- foot container, would be 
delivered in less than a month to a distribution center in 
Tennessee or a hypermarché in France. Global supply 
chains became so routine that in September 2001, when 
U.S. customs authorities stepped up border inspections 
following the terrorist attack that destroyed the World 
Trade Center in New York, auto plants in Michigan 
began shutting down within three days for lack of im -
ported parts.
The improvement in logistics shows up statistically in 
reduced inventory levels. Inventories are a cost: whoever 
owns them has had to pay for them but has yet to receive 
money from selling them. Better, more reliable transport 
has permitted companies to obtain goods closer to the 
time they need them, instead of weeks or months in ad-
vance, tying up less money in goods sitting uselessly on 
warehouse shelves. In the United States, inventories 
began falling in the mid- 1980s, as the concepts of just- 
in- time manufacturing took root. Manufacturers such as 
Dell and retailers such as Wal- Mart Stores have taken the 
concept to extremes, designing their entire business strat-
egies around moving goods from factory floor to cus-
tomer with minimal time in between. In 2014, invento-
ries in the United States were perhaps $1.2 trillion lower 
Just in Time • 359
than they would have been had they stayed at the level 
of the 1980s, relative to sales. Assume that the money 
needed to finance those inventories would have been 
borrowed at, say, 8 percent, and inventory reductions 
saved U.S. businesses roughly $100 billion per year.4
This precision performance would have been unat -
tainable without containerization. So long as cargo was 
handled one item at a time, with long delays at the docks 
and complicated interchanges between trucks, trains, 
planes, and ships, freight transportation was too unpre-
dictable for manufacturers to take the risk that supplies 
from faraway places would arrive right on time. They 
needed to hold large stocks of components to ensure that 
their production lines would keep moving. The container, 
combined with the computer, sharply reduced that risk, 
opening the way to globalization. Companies can make 
each component, and each retail product, at the cheapest 
location, taking wage rates, taxes, subsidies, energy costs, 
and import tariffs into account, along with consider -
ations such as transit times and security. The cost of 
transportation is still a factor in the cost equation, but in 
many cases it is no longer a large one.
Globalization, historians and economists have hastened 
to point out, is not a new phenomenon. The world econ-
omy became highly integrated in the nineteenth century. 
The decline of tariffs and other trade barriers in the years 
following the Napoleonic Wars led international trade to 
increase after decades of stagnation, and the introduc -
tion of the oceangoing steamship in the 1840s sharply 
reduced transport costs. Ocean freight rates fell 70 per -
cent between 1840 and 1910, encouraging increased 
360 • Chapter 14
shipment of commodities and manufactured goods 
around the world, while the telegraph—the nineteenth- 
century counterpart of the Internet—gave people in one 
location current information about prices in another. 
Prices of grain, meat, textiles, and other commodities 
converged across borders, as traders found it easy to in-
crease imports whenever domestic prices rose or domes-
tic wages got out of hand.
5
The globalization of the late twentieth century took 
on quite a different character. International trade was no 
longer dominated by essential raw materials or finished 
products. Fewer than one- third of the containers im -
ported through Southern California in 1998 contained 
consumer goods. Most of the rest were links in global 
supply chains, carrying what economists call “intermedi-
ate goods,” factory inputs that have been partially pro-
cessed in one place and will be processed further some-
place else. The majority of the metal boxes moving 
around the world hold not televisions and dresses, but 
industrial products such as synthetic resins, engine parts, 
wastepaper, screws, and, yes, Barbie’s hair.
6
In international production- sharing arrangements of 
this sort, the manufacturer or retailer at the top of the 
chain will find the most economical location for each 
part of the process. This used to be impossible: high 
transportation costs acted as a trade barrier, very similar 
in effect to high tariffs on imports, sheltering the jobs of 
production workers from foreign competition but im -
posing higher prices on consumers. As the container 
made international transportation cheaper and more de-
pendable, it lowered that barrier, decimating manufac -
turing employment in North America, Western Europe, 
Just in Time • 361
and Japan, by making it much easier for manufacturers 
to go overseas in search of low- cost inputs. The labor- 
intensive assembly will be done in a low- wage country—
but there are many low- wage countries. The various 
components and raw materials will come from which -
ever location can supply them most cheaply—but costs 
in different locations often are quite similar. Even small 
changes in transport costs can be decisive in determining 
where each stage of the process will occur.
7
The economics of containerization have shaped these 
global supply chains in peculiar ways. Distance matters, 
but not hugely so. A doubling of the distance cargo is 
shipped—from Hong Kong to Los Angeles, for example, 
rather than Tokyo to Los Angles—raises the shipping 
cost only 18 percent. Places far from the end market can 
still be part of an international supply chain, so long as 
they have well- run ports and a lot of volume.
8
Container shipping thrives on volume: the more con-
tainers moving through a port or traveling on a ship or 
train, the lower the cost per box. Places with lower de-
mand or poorer infrastructure will face higher transport 
costs and will be far less attractive manufacturing sites 
for the global market. In the 1970s and 1980s, when 
many U.S. industrial centers were dying, Los Angeles 
thrived as a factory location because it was home to the 
nation’s busiest containerport, and Los Angeles thrived 
as a port because it was well located to handle import 
volume from Asia, not just for California, but for the 
entire United States. The Pacific Rim became the world’s 
workshop for consumer goods, in good part, because 
large ports for containers gave it some of the world’s low-
est shipping costs: between 1990 and 2013, $14 billion 
362 • Chapter 14
was invested in 72 privately run seaport projects in China 
alone, in addition to billions invested in state- run proj-
ects. Antwerp spent a stunning $4 billion on port expan-
sion between 1987 and 1997, including expropriation of 
4,500 acres (2,000 hectares) of land, just to keep itself in 
the game. Conversely, African countries with inefficient 
ports and little containership service are at such a 
transport- cost disadvantage that even rock- bottom labor 
costs will not attract investment in manufacturing.
9
Shippers in places with busy ports and good land- 
transport infrastructure not only enjoy lower freight 
rates, but they also benefit from the shortest shipping 
times. Before the container, when breakbulk vessels like 
the Warrior carried most of the world’s trade, cargo typi-
cally left the factory weeks before the ship departed, 
sailed at a glacial 16 knots, and spent an unproductive 
week in the hold each time the vessel called at an addi-
tional port. In the container age, a machine manufac -
tured on Monday can be dropped at Port Newark on 
Tuesday and delivered in Stuttgart, Germany, in less time 
than it once would have taken to be loaded aboard a ship 
such as the Warrior. Yet time still matters. By one esti -
mate, each day seaborne goods spend under way raises 
the exporter’s costs by 0.8 percent, which means that a 
typical 13- day voyage from China to the United States 
has the same effect as a 10 percent tariff. The time sav-
ings represent a huge competitive advantage to shippers 
located near a major port. Those served by smaller ports 
may have to endure longer wait times between ships or 
shuttle links to a larger port, adding time, and hence 
costs, to every shipment. Air freight all but eliminates the 
costs of time, but it is too expensive for most goods that 
Just in Time • 363
are made in poor countries precisely because little value 
is added in their production.10
“Any change in technology,” the economist Joel Mokyr 
observed, “leads almost inevitably to an improvement in 
the welfare of some and to a deterioration in that of oth-
ers.” That was as true of the container as of other tech-
nologies, but on an international scale. Containerization 
did not create geographical disadvantage, but it has ar -
guably made it a more serious problem.
11
Before the container, shipping was expensive for ev -
eryone. The most expensive part of international freight 
transportation, loading cargo aboard ship, affected all 
shippers equally. Containerization has reduced interna-
tional transport costs for some much more than for oth-
ers. Landlocked countries, inland places in countries 
with poor infrastructure, and countries without enough 
economic activity to generate high demand for container 
shipping may have a tougher competitive situation now 
than they did in breakbulk days. Being landlocked, one 
study calculated, raises a country’s average shipping 
costs by half. Another study found that it cost $2,500 to 
ship a container from Baltimore, on the U.S. Atlantic 
Coast, to Durban, in South Africa—and $7,500 more to 
haul it by road the 215 miles from Durban to Maseru, in 
Lesotho. Within China, the World Bank reported in 
2002, transporting a container from central China to a 
port cost three times as much as shipping it from the port 
to America. China was slow to learn the lesson: in the 
early 21st century, it built the Yangshan Deep- Water 
Port, near Shanghai, to be the world’s largest container 
terminal—without providing a railway link to move the 
cargo cheaply to and from the dock.
12
364 • Chapter 14
If high shipping costs, high port costs, and long wait-
ing times do not leave a country at an economic disad-
vantage, a cargo imbalance might. Relatively few routes, 
it turns out, have an evenly balanced flow of maritime 
exports and imports. When the flow is out of balance, 
shippers in the more heavily trafficked direction have to 
pick up the cost of sending empty containers back in the 
other direction. Around 20 percent of all containers 
shipped internationally are empty, but on some routes 
the imbalance is far worse: at Los Angeles, the United 
States’ largest containerport, half the outbound contain-
ers in 2014 were empty. Yet such an imbalance in trade 
can have a silver lining. After China joined the World 
Trade Organization in 2002, its trade surplus with the 
United States exploded, such that by 2009, two and a 
half times as many containers moved from East Asia to 
North America as from North America to East Asia. En-
trepreneurs quickly figured out that low westbound 
freight rates made it sensible to fill those containers with 
low- value goods, such as wastepaper and grain. In 2014, 
U.S. farmers exported more than 50,000 40- foot boxes 
loaded with soybeans, a commodity long deemed unsuit-
able for shipping in containers. Greater use of containers 
for agricultural exports, in turn, opened doors to previ-
ously unimagined markets: when Canadian farmers dis-
covered that Asian buyers would pay extra for barley 
and canola that could be traced to a specific farm, con-
tainers with single- use plastic liners offered an inexpen-
sive way to move the product.
13
The revolutionary days of container shipping were over 
by the early 1980s. Yet the aftereffects of the container 
Just in Time • 365
revolution continued to reverberate. Over the next three 
decades, as container shipping began to drive interna -
tional freight costs down, the volume of sea freight 
shipped in containers rose five times over. Hamburg, 
Germany’s largest port, handled 11 million tons of gen-
eral cargo in 1960; in 1996, more than 40 million tons 
of general cargo crossed the Hamburg docks, 88 percent 
of it in containers, and more than half of it from Asia. By 
2014, Hamburg’s general- cargo trade topped 100 mil-
lion tons. The prices of electronics, clothing, and other 
consumer goods tumbled as imports displaced domestic 
products from store shelves in Europe, Japan, and North 
America. Low- cost products that would not be viable to 
trade without container shipping diffused quickly around 
the world. Declining goods prices in the late 1990s, 
thanks largely to imports, helped bring three decades of 
inflation to an end.
14
Container shipping, it is clear, has helped some cities 
and countries become part of the new global supply 
chains, while leaving others to the side. It has assisted the 
rapid economic growth of Korea while offering precious 
little to Paraguay. Yet the trade patterns that container-
ization has helped to create are not immutable. In the 
1980s, ship lines’ commitments assured the success of 
several late entrants to containerization, such as Busan, 
in Korea; Charleston, South Carolina; and Le Havre, in 
France. In the 1990s, they repeated the trick on a much 
larger scale in Asia. Major ports began to sprout in places 
like Chittagong, in Bangladesh, and Haiphong, in Viet-
nam, as those countries became important exporters of 
apparel. In the Indian Ocean, new terminals have turned 
Colombo, a previously sleepy port in Sri Lanka, into a 
366 • Chapter 14
major container crossroads. Salalah, in a thinly popu -
lated region of Oman, saw its first container only in 
1998; within a decade, due to ship lines’ desire for a con-
tainer transfer point on the Indian Ocean, it was handling 
more than 1.5 million truck- size containers per year.
By the early twenty- first century, the container ship-
ping industry was dominated by a handful of alliances of 
global scope. These companies’ megaships may have 
sailed between two ports, but the cargo they carried was 
increasingly unlikely to have been produced in or to be 
destined for the end points of the voyage. By deciding 
where to employ their vessels, the big ship lines had the 
power to determine which ports succeeded and which 
struggled. In some cases, that choice was made for un-
avoidable reasons; not all ports had the depth required 
to handle the biggest ships. In other cases, though, ship 
lines joined with government officials and private port 
operators to change comparative advantage. The list of 
the world’s largest containerports around the turn of the 
twenty- first century is instructive. Of the twenty ports 
handling the greatest number of containers in 2014, 
eleven had seen little or no container traffic in 1990, and 
several had not functioned as ports at all. As late as 2000, 
Hong Kong served almost all of China’s international 
trade, as there were no large containerports on the Chi-
nese mainland. By 2014, seven of the world’s ten largest 
containerports were in China, and no port in Europe or 
the Western Hemisphere was on the list.
These new ports, by and large, were privately man -
aged, and in some cases privately financed. Their cre -
ation was a deliberate response to the economics of con-
tainer shipping, in which keeping the ship moving is 
Just in Time • 367
what matters most. Only the biggest ports are worth a 
time- consuming stop: in 2014, 46 percent of world con-
tainer shipments moved through just 20 ports, the small-
est of which handled more than four million 40- foot 
containers. The ports that can load the most containers 
Table 6. The World’s Largest Container Ports: Containers Handled 
(Million 20- Foot Equivalents)
Port Country 1990 2003 2014
Shanghai China 0.5 11.4 35.3
Singapore Singapore 5.2 18.4 33.9
Shenzhen China 0.0 10.7 24.0
Hong Kong China 5.1 20.8 22.2
Ningbo- Zhoushan China 0.0 2.8 19.5
Busan Korea 2.3 10.4 18.7
Qingdao China 0.1 4.2 16.6
Guangzhou China 0.1 2.8 16.6
Dubai Dubai 1.1 5.1 15.3
Tianjin China 0.3 3.0 14.0
Rotterdam Netherlands 3.7 7.1 12.3
Port Klang Malaysia 0.5 4.8 10.9
Kaoshiung Taiwan 3.5 8.8 10.6
Dalian China 0.0 1.7 10.1
Hamburg Germany 2.0 6.1 9.3
Antwerp Belgium 1.6 5.4 9.0
Xiamen China 0.0 2.3 8.6
Tokyo- Yokohama Japan 1.5 3.3 8.5
Tangung Pelepas Malaysia 0.0 3.5 8.5
Los Angeles United States 2.6 6.6 8.3
Source: Containerisation International Yearbook and UN Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
368 • Chapter 14
per hour consume less of a vessel’s precious time. Effi -
cient ports, with access to large flows of cargo, will re-
ceive large ships and frequent service, with direct sailings 
to every corner of the world. The massive ports con -
structed in China, Malaysia, and Thailand between 1990 
and 2010 were investments in globalization. So was Pi-
raeus, an ancient Greek port with negligible container 
traffic, which saw business increase tenfold in five years 
after China Ocean Shipping Company took it over in 
2009 and spent $1 billion on modernization. Factories 
whose goods use those ports will have the lowest rates 
and the lowest costs in lost time, saving money on im -
ported inputs and gaining a cost advantage in export 
markets. Manufacturers in poorer countries, where ports 
are less busy or less well managed, will find that their 
high logistics costs make competing in foreign markets a 
difficult proposition.
15
That disadvantage goes far beyond the occasional lost 
export sale. A country cursed with outmoded or badly 
run ports is a country that faces great obstacles to finding 
a larger role in the world economy. In 2004, the World 
Bank estimated that if Peru were as effective at port man-
agement as Australia, that alone would increase its for -
eign trade by one- quarter. The Peruvian government 
took that warning seriously, arranging $2 billion in port 
investments over the ensuing decade, which made pos -
sible a very large increase in foreign trade. Tanzania, on 
the other hand, staunchly resisted modernization. If only 
the port at Dar es Salaam had been as efficient as the 
nearby port at Mombasa, in Kenya, the average Tanza-
nian family in 2012 would have saved a stunning 8.5 
percent of its annual expenses. Countries that fail to 
Just in Time • 369
modernize their ports will receive the maritime equiva-
lent of branchline service on a single- track railway. The 
big containerships that link national economies in the 
global supply chain, carrying nothing but stacks of metal 
boxes, will pass them by.
16
Those ships themselves grew far larger in the first 
years of the twenty- first century. In 2001, only a handful 
of vessels could carry more than three thousand truck- 
size containers, and much smaller ships carried the bulk 
of the world’s trade. By 2015, behemoths holding 10,000 
40- foot containers had joined the world’s merchant fleet, 
and ships that had been state- of- the- art two decades ear-
lier were being sold for scrap. By some estimates, the 
giant vessels cut 30 percent or more off the cost of mov-
ing a container from Asia to Europe: a ship laden with 
10,000 full- size containers burns perhaps half as much 
fuel per box as one carrying 3,000 containers, and the 
size of the crew need be no larger.
But for all their advantages, the new vessels brought 
serious disadvantages as well. Entering service after the 
financial crisis of 2008–10, when the growth of interna-
tional trade was slower than at any time for half a cen-
tury, they added vast amounts of capacity, rendering 
much of the container shipping industry unprofitable. 
The big ships came with large mortgages and limited 
flexibility, exposing their owners to great risk if sufficient 
cargo failed to materialize. These big ships gained many 
of their economies by steaming more slowly than their 
predecessors, lengthening transit times and thereby rais-
ing shippers’ costs. The giant vessels’ size required ocean 
terminals to load and discharge more boxes but made it 
harder for them to do so. Their added width—as many 
370 • Chapter 14
as 23 containers abreast—meant that a crane took lon-
ger to move the average box from ship to shore, while 
their lack of additional length left terminals no room to 
move more cranes alongside to handle the additional 
cargo. The net result was longer port calls, wiping out 
some of the saving gained from greater efficiency at sea.
The megaships’ demands also strained the finances of 
ports and their public- sector owners. “Shipping lines 
generally do not consult with the other actors in the 
transport chain on their projects. We have not found any 
evidence of attempts of coordination or prior warnings 
in this respect,” one authoritative study concluded in 
2015. Ports around the world spent billions of dollars 
blasting rock from harbor floors to provide 50 feet of 
depth. On the landside, terminals needed new truck 
gates, highway connections, and rail yards to handle the 
crush of boxes. The Dutch government spent $5.8 billion 
(€4.7 billion) on a two- track all- freight railway to move 
containers from Rotterdam to the German border. Re -
covering the cost of such investments, though, proved 
difficult. Competition from other ports and other forms 
of transport made it difficult to raise port charges and 
rail freight rates. Besides, as vessels grew larger, fewer 
came to call. Where once a terminal might have serviced 
a steady stream of smaller ships, now it might see an 
extremely large containership only once a week, leaving 
costly infrastructure unused for days at a time. Although 
dozens of ports around the world dredged their harbors 
to accommodate the giant ships, their outlays often did 
not attract enough ships to justify the investment. Two 
years after its opening in 2012, the deepwater port in 
Just in Time • 371
Wilhelmshaven, Germany, built at a cost of $434 million 
(€350 million) specifically to handle containerships that 
required too much depth to call at Hamburg or Bremen, 
had seen almost no traffic.
17
No project better illustrated the risks of the new envi-
ronment than the expansion of the Panama Canal. The 
original canal, which opened in 1914, suited the needs of 
a different era. Containerships carrying more than 2,500 
40- foot containers are too large to pass through its locks. 
Starting in 2007, the government agency overseeing the 
canal spent close to $6 billion to build longer, wider, and 
deeper locks to accommodate ships carrying roughly 
6,500 containers. The canal expansion allowed much 
larger ships to cross the Pacific from East Asia to the 
Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico coasts of North America, 
and several U.S. ports deepened their harbors, at consid-
erable cost, so they can receive the much larger vessels. 
But when the gates to the new locks slid open in 2016, 
there was no guarantee that traffic would come, for the 
Panama Canal is not the only route available between 
Asia and eastern North America. If U.S. railroads were 
to drop their rates and Pacific ports were to improve 
their efficiency, it could be cheaper to ship to Pittsburgh 
and Cincinnati through Los Angeles and Long Beach 
than to pay the Canal’s tolls plus the cost of operating a 
vessel for several additional days. If labor- intensive man-
ufacturing shifts from an increasingly expensive China 
to lower- cost countries in South Asia or Africa, more 
America- bound ships may sail through the newly wid -
ened Suez Canal and cross the Atlantic rather than the 
Pacific, depriving the Panama Canal of traffic. The bil -
372 • Chapter 14
lions of dollars invested on a larger canal and deeper 
North American harbors may pay off big time—or they 
may never pay off at all.
It was not just ports that were affected by the constant 
changes in container shipping. Dramatic shifts in technol-
ogy challenged labor unions as well. Back in the 1960s, 
unions and waterfront employers had addressed the 
painful human consequences of containerization, reach-
ing agreements that compensated the thousands of work-
ers whose services were no longer needed while allowing 
automation on the docks. For the relatively small num-
bers of longshoremen who remained after the container 
took hold, dock work became an altogether safer and 
better- paid career than in the days of breakbulk shipping. 
Unexpectedly, unions discovered that while containeriza-
tion had decimated their ranks, it had bolstered their bar-
gaining power. With containerships costing hundreds of 
millions of dollars, shipowners could ill afford work 
stoppages that might tie up their vessels, and they encour-
aged terminal operators to reach agreements rather than 
risk strikes. Dock work soon became one of the most 
highly paid blue- collar occupations around. Dockers, 
long disparaged for their insular culture and unique 
mores, were envied as the elite of the working class.
But the transformation of the docks did not stop. By 
the 1990s, computers took over the work of checkers, 
whose clipboards were no longer required to keep track 
of containers during loading and unloading. What had 
always been dock work was now in the charge of com-
puter operators sitting before screens in air- conditioned 
offices, and to protect their influence the unions had to 
Just in Time • 373
sign them up. The next blow came early in the 2000s, as 
automated guided vehicles, long used in factories, ap -
peared on the waterfront. Where they were introduced, 
workers were no longer needed to drive the transporters 
that move containers between storage yards and ships. 
Unmanned stacking cranes followed, automatically lift-
ing a container from a stack and placing it aboard a 
transporter; the work of the longshoremen who once  
ran the machines was now performed by a technician  
in a control room monitoring six or eight stackers at a  
time. When Rotterdam’s massive Maasvlakte 2 terminal 
opened in 2014, surrounded by a two- mile wall built to 
keep out the North Sea, an automated system notified 
truck drivers when to bring an outbound box to the ter-
minal. At the appointed time, a driver would be admitted 
through an automated gate after sensors had verified his 
credentials and scanned the truck and the container, and 
another automated system would instruct him where to 
back up to the security fence that surrounded the storage 
yard. There, a computer- controlled vehicle would lift the 
container off its chassis, bring it over the fence, carry it to 
its assigned location, and stack it at the proper level. If 
everything functioned properly, the trucker would drive 
away having encountered no human being face to face.
One part of the container- handling process, the move-
ment of boxes between ship and shore, remained stub-
bornly resistant to automation. The dockworkers who 
drove those cranes were the elite of the labor elite, having 
waited years for a chance to earn more than many a 
banker or an engineer. Not all dockers could do the job, 
which demanded dexterity and sharp eyesight to pluck 
containers from a ship rolling with the waves, move 
374 • Chapter 14
them smoothly to transport vehicles waiting on the 
dock, grasp containers for the return trip, and deposit 
them precisely between the steel corners of the cells in 
vessels’ holds. Innovations, such as cranes capable of 
transporting one box horizontally while simultaneously 
lifting another vertically, sped up the process, but a 
crane driver was still essential. Seated in a cabin 150 feet 
in the air, looking down through a glass floor at a con-
tainer dangling far below, a human operator could ad-
just to the constant movement of a ship far better than 
any computer.
In 2010, the livelihoods of ship- to- shore crane drivers 
suddenly came under threat. At the Manzanillo Interna-
tional Terminal in Colon, Panama, operators seated in a 
comfortable control room a half mile from the dock ser-
viced a containership by remote control, watching the 
action on screens and moving their cranes with joysticks. 
At first, the system did not run smoothly: the veteran 
crane drivers, it turned out, relied partly on sound to get 
their bearings, and working in silence hurt their accu -
racy. Once microphones were installed on the cranes and 
speakers placed in the control room so the operators 
could hear every clang and whir, the tempo returned to 
normal. The system was reliable enough that by 2014, 
terminals began to install ship- to- shore cranes without 
cabins, to be operated only by remote control. Remote- 
control cranes have not done away with jobs, but they 
threaten to devalue them. As veteran crane drivers retire, 
they may well be replaced by youngsters whose qualifica-
tions have less to do with handling cargo than with play-
ing video games.
CHAPTER 15
Adding Value
The small but cosmopolitan city of Antwerp, built in 
lowlands along the River Scheldt on the northern edge 
of Belgium, has been a port since medieval times. Despite 
the ravages of Europe’s many wars, its international ori-
entation and entrepreneurial inclinations have made it 
wealthy. In the sixteenth century, wrote historian Fer -
nand Braudel, “this city was the centre of the entire in-
ternational economy.” In the late twentieth, it ranked 
among the very biggest ports in the world.1
At the start of the twenty- first century, though, warn-
ing signals were flashing. For all its charms, Antwerp was 
anchored to a slow- growing part of the world. Western 
Europe’s economy had become far less dynamic than in 
earlier years, and in Germany, one of Antwerp’s key mar-
kets, the population was starting to fall. Moreover, con-
sumers’ spending patterns were shifting, with a greater 
share of outlays going for services that did not require 
cargo shipping, from yoga classes to tropical vacations. 
None of this boded well for the import trade that was 
Antwerp’s bread and butter. Worse, the great global shift 
of manufacturing was tapering off. From the late 1960s 
until the early 2000s, each percentage point of economic 
376 • Chapter 15
growth in Europe had brought a 3 to 4 percent increase 
in foreign trade. That growth had been propelled by the 
development of new supply chains, first as the European 
Union brought down barriers among its member states 
and then as manufacturing expanded in East Asia. But 
that industrial restructuring could not continue forever. 
As it ended, the port authority’s economists estimated, 
the amount of commerce flowing across Antwerp’s docks 
would grow not much faster than the European econ -
omy, which was to say, not much at all.
The realization that the boom in trade would soon be 
over kindled a public debate. When it was over, Ant -
werp’s leaders agreed that the port should go in a differ-
ent direction. No longer should it chase cargo, expand-
ing to keep up with Rotterdam, its competitor 65 miles 
to the north. In particular, it should not covet trade that 
was simply passing through. Instead, Antwerp should 
use its great resource, land around the docks, to attract 
shipping- related businesses that would do more in Ant-
werp than just land cargo. As a port executive explained 
the new rules, “It’s not a game about tons, it’s a game 
about employment and diversification, and added value 
creation.”
2
Such talk reflected a dramatic change in the port busi-
ness. In the second half of the twentieth century, ports 
competed madly for cargo, often paying for wharves, 
storage areas, and machinery in the hope more vessels 
would call. The total tonnage and the number of 20- foot 
equivalent units (TEUs) crossing the docks were the mea-
sures of success. But as their scale increased in dramatic 
fashion—Singapore handled six times as many contain-
ers in 2014 as in 1990, Busan eight times as many—ports 
Adding Value • 377
began to be seen less as amenities than as public nui -
sances. Much of the work once performed near the port 
had migrated elsewhere. Containers were increasingly 
stuffed and unstuffed at distribution centers located far 
from the docks, and the job of figuring out how vessels 
should be loaded could be done anywhere there was a 
computer terminal and an Internet connection. From 
Genoa to Long Beach, locals asked why they should put 
up with the noise, diesel fumes, and congestion caused 
by a mammoth industrial establishment that occupied 
valuable waterfront real estate but provided very few 
waterfront jobs.
Antwerp’s answer to that question was determined, in 
part, by a lawsuit challenging the port authority’s deci-
sions to lease land without considering the benefit and 
profitability of a proposed use. In response, the port au-
thority decided that a company seeking land near the 
docks should detail how many containers its develop -
ment would handle, how many workers it would employ, 
and how much value those workers would add. Land 
around the port would be treated as a scarce resource, 
and would be leased to bidders whose projects promised 
the greatest benefit to the local economy—with contracts 
providing for fines if they failed to meet their promises. 
Oil tank farms with negligible employment were out. 
Facilities that involved manufacturing or processing the 
goods arriving in containers were in.
In trying to capture value, Antwerp had no shortage 
of competition, and not just from nearby seaports like 
Rotterdam and Le Havre. As container volumes rose and 
shippers became ever more sophisticated about manag-
ing their cargo, ports began to arise in places miles from 
378 • Chapter 15
the sea. Called logistics clusters or freight villages, these 
built- from- scratch complexes centered on rail yards, 
river ports, or even airports. With several distribution 
centers at a single location, often owned by a single de-
veloper, a logistics cluster could support better transpor-
tation infrastructure and more frequent service than any 
single distribution center could have hoped for. The eco-
nomic importance of the logistics center concept, though, 
lay in the fact that many of those distribution centers 
performed work once considered to be in the manufac-
turing sector, processing goods before final delivery to 
customers rather than merely storing them.3
The container thus changed economic geography once 
again. Colon, a steamy port near the Atlantic entrance to 
the Panama Canal, has had a vast free trade zone for 
decades, with hundreds of aging warehouses and sales 
offices dealing in goods destined for Latin America and 
the Caribbean. Typically, these operations involved little 
more than opening 40- foot containers filled with shoes 
or televisions, placing the contents in storage, and re -
packing them in smaller quantities when needed in Ven-
ezuela or Jamaica. Many goods, never ordered by whole-
salers or retailers in the region, were eventually destroyed 
after months in the warehouse. When the Manzanillo 
International Terminal opened on a former U.S. military 
base in 1995, it set aside land for a far more sophisticated 
operation. Workers in a modern building received phar-
maceuticals made abroad, stored them in temperature- 
controlled rooms, and then, as orders arrived, assembled 
them in individual consumer packages with whatever 
information labels, warnings, and price tags were ap -
propriate for Colombia or Brazil. This work no longer 
Adding Value • 379
needed to be done at the pharmaceutical plant, where 
dealing with the special requirements of many different 
countries could gum up production. Almost surrepti -
tiously, those former factory jobs had moved to a distri-
bution center in Panama.
Antwerp itself serves several logistics centers. Arriving 
containers filled with cucumbers from Israel and ba -
nanas from Ecuador go by barge or rail to Venlo, in the 
Netherlands, where dozens of businesses clean, sort, and 
package the produce for delivery to European supermar-
kets. Barges and trains ferry cargo up the Rhine to Duis-
burg, in Germany, where the sites of a defunct steel mill 
and a smelter have been remade as logistics centers em-
ploying thousands. In Laakdal, 50 miles southeast of 
Antwerp, Nike built one of Europe’s largest distribution 
centers along the Albert Canal to receive containers of 
clothing and sporting goods by barge, allowing the com-
pany to tout its environmentally friendly logistics sys -
tem. The container has enabled logistics centers such as 
these to prosper by adding value to global supply chains, 
capturing jobs that were once performed elsewhere, or 
not at all.
The seaport, however, is not assured of their business. 
Supply chains can run in many different directions, using 
many possible combinations of railroads, trucks, ports, 
and ship lines. They will run through Antwerp only so 
long as the total cost and transit time are competitive 
with those on routes through other ports. A port can 
help its cause by smoothing the passage of through cargo. 
Antwerp has done so by promoting barge services that 
move containers cheaply to Germany, France, and Swit-
zerland and by simplifying the paperwork that can drive 
380 • Chapter 15
importers crazy. But Antwerp cannot control whether it 
is the first European port of call for containerships com-
ing from Asia, or the last. That difference, perhaps one 
week’s time, could determine whether a shipper’s cargo 
moves through Antwerp or somewhere else.
Perhaps no place better exemplifies the struggle for port 
supremacy than the Persian Gulf emirate of Dubai. Long 
a small fishing port, Dubai centered its economy on the 
tidal creek used by dhows shuttling goods to and from 
emirates nearby. In 1976, the government announced 
plans for a containerport in a village called Jebel Ali, a 
few miles to the southwest. The lack of a natural harbor 
was no obstacle: within a few years, Jebel Ali would be 
the largest manmade harbor in the world, and the dhows 
would become a tourist attraction.
The project’s timing was fortuitous. As the first phase 
was completed in 1979, soaring oil prices left Saudi Ara-
bia flush with cash but lacking a modern port to handle 
the consumer goods that were flooding in. Dubai quickly 
filled that niche. Building on that small success, the gov-
ernment created a free trade zone in 1985, enabling ship-
pers to bring merchandise into the country, store it tax- 
free in warehouses near the port, and then ship it onward. 
That move turned Jebel Ali from an import destination 
into a hub. Its ascent was aided by a reputed lack of cor-
ruption as well as a reputation for efficiency. In part be-
cause it had no labor unions to deal with, Jebel Ali ranked 
near the very top among the world’s ports in the average 
number of container moves per ship per hour in 2013, 
and its computers allowed 9,000 over- the- road trucks to 
deliver and pick up containers each day with little delay. 
Adding Value • 381
The port’s operator, a state- owned company called Dubai 
Ports World, became a powerhouse in its own right, sign-
ing leases to run ocean terminals in places as far flung as 
British Columbia, Senegal, and the Philippines.
Jebel Ali’s seemingly endless expansion, even after the 
growth of world trade slowed during the 2008–10 finan-
cial crisis, turned it into one of the largest containerports 
in the world. By 2015, its three terminals had enough 
berths and cranes to work ten of the latest megaships at 
once, and it handled more containers than New York 
and Los Angeles combined. And even more ambitious 
plans were in the works. The port’s maps showed loca-
tions for terminals four, five, six, and seven, ready to 
build as demand required. A new freight railroad system, 
designed to carry containers throughout the United Arab 
Emirates and into Saudi Arabia, was under construction. 
With a new international airport opening a stone’s throw 
to the south, there was even talk of offering a combined 
sea- air service between Asia and Europe, a throwback to 
a concept pioneered, unsuccessfully, by Malcom McLean 
in the 1950s.
Although official statistics are meager, the available 
evidence suggests that the Jebel Ali containerport helped 
remake Dubai’s economy. In 2013, re- exports from the 
emirate and its free trade zone were far larger than the 
emirate’s gross domestic product. Some $100 billion of 
goods, nearly half the total value of imports, was re- 
exported to the other emirates, Saudi Arabia, East Africa, 
and South Asia. Its status as the trade hub of the Persian 
Gulf helped the emirate become the region’s financial 
hub, to the point that property, business services, and 
financial services accounted for a full quarter of eco -
382 • Chapter 15
nomic output. Dubai’s trade- induced prosperity drew in 
hundreds of thousands of foreign residents and millions 
of tourists, whose demand for consumer goods and 
housing pulled yet more cargo through Jebel Ali.
Dubai was an improbable entry into the ranks of the 
world’s largest ports. Its location, well inside the entrance 
to the Persian Gulf, is less than ideal, forcing vessels 
headed from China and Southeast Asia to the Suez Canal 
to steam well out of their way. It offers no natural har -
bor. The local population is small, and the harsh and arid 
land beyond, the storied Empty Quarter of Saudi Arabia, 
has hardly any permanent inhabitants at all. There is 
plenty of competition for ships and cargo on the Persian 
Gulf, with large ports at Abu Dhabi, an hour by car to 
the southwest, and Sharjah and Khor Fakkan, just to the 
northeast. For all of these reasons, Dubai, without the 
container, might still be a small village on a tidal creek. 
Instead, with careful management and a very large 
amount of investment, the container enabled a small 
sheikdom on the edge of the desert to embed itself as a 
crucial link in supply chains stretching around the world.
Global supply chains were not on anyone’s mind in the 
spring of 1956. Over the next half century, freight trans-
portation developed in ways that could not have been 
imagined by the dignitaries watching the Ideal- X take on 
those first containers at Port Newark. Perhaps the most 
remarkable fact about the remarkable history of the box 
is that time and again, even the most knowledgeable ex-
perts misjudged the course of events. The container 
proved to be such a dynamic force that almost nothing 
Adding Value • 383
it touched was left unchanged, and those changes often 
were not as predicted.
Malcom McLean’s genius was acknowledged unani-
mously: almost everyone save the dockworkers’ unions 
thought that putting freight into containers was a bril-
liant concept. The idea that the container would cause a 
revolution in shipping, though, seemed more than a little 
far- fetched. At best, the container was expected to help 
ships recover a tiny share of the domestic freight business 
and to benefit Hawaii and Puerto Rico. Truckers ignored 
it. Railroads shunned it. Even as ship lines talked up the 
container, most of them treated it as an adjunct to the 
business they knew, just another one of the many shapes 
and sizes of cargo that they were accustomed to storing 
in their holds. Labor was no more prescient. When West 
Coast longshore union leader Harry Bridges negotiated 
the 1960 contract that allowed unlimited automation of 
the docks, he drastically underestimated the speed with 
which containers would alter work on the waterfront, 
and demanded far too little for his members as a result. 
When New York longshore leader Teddy Gleason warned 
in 1959 that the container would eliminate 30 percent of 
his union’s jobs in New York, he was simply wrong: be-
tween 1963 and 1976, longshore hours worked in New 
York City fell by three- quarters.
The economics of container shipping were equally 
treacherous for ship operators themselves. Many ship 
lines sacrificed the potential advantages of containeriza-
tion by ordering vessels that carried containers along 
with other types of cargo or even passengers. Others 
guessed wrong about how big their ships or their con -
384 • Chapter 15
tainers should be. McLean himself went badly astray 
several times: he ordered fuel- guzzling SL- 7s just ahead 
of the 1973 oil shock, built the sluggish but fuel- efficient 
Econships just as fuel prices plummeted, and sailed the 
Econships on a round- the- world route that left some legs 
heavily booked but others operating well below capacity. 
The “experts” who deemed container shipping uncom -
petitive on long routes, such as those across the Pacific, 
were proven to be wildly off course, and Asia’s contain-
erports, filled with boxes destined for North America 
and Europe, soon became the largest in the world.
Haste, contrary to what many in the shipping industry 
had assumed, was not a prerequisite for survival in the 
container era. Matson, previously active only in U.S. do-
mestic trades, raced to become the first line to carry con-
tainers across the Pacific in the belief that an early start 
would assure it loyal customers; as it learned when other 
companies rudely barged into the business, customer 
loyalty counted for little. Moore- McCormack may have 
been the first line to carry containers across the Atlantic, 
but it could not turn that head start into a viable busi-
ness. Nor did Grace Line’s role as the first container car-
rier to South America make it a survivor.
The companies that emerged as the world’s largest 
containership operators in the early twenty- first century 
were relative latecomers to the game. A. P. Møller’s 
Maersk Line built its first containership only in 1973, 
seventeen years after the Ideal- X and seven years after 
container shipping came to the North Atlantic. Mediter-
ranean Shipping Company, based in Switzerland, did not 
even exist until 1970, and Evergreen Marine was founded 
only in 1968. These companies arrived with financial 
Adding Value • 385
and managerial skills foreign to many of the carriers they 
replaced, skills appropriate to an industry in which rais-
ing capital and managing information systems were far 
more important than maritime knowledge. They oper -
ated without the legacy of government subsidies and di-
rectives that had crippled many of their predecessors by 
forcing them to buy ships built in their home countries 
or to sail routes determined by regulators. In an industry 
that almost everywhere wrapped itself in nationalist 
pride, the long- term survivors were profoundly interna-
tional. Maersk’s headquarters were in Denmark, but by 
2015 it had gained control of more than six hundred 
containerships and one- sixth of the world market by ab-
sorbing companies as diverse as Britain’s Overseas Con-
tainers Ltd., South African Marine, the Dutch shipping 
giant Nedlloyd, and Malcom McLean’s old company, 
Sea- Land Service.
If the market repeatedly misjudged the container, so 
did the state. Governments in New York City and San 
Francisco ignored the consequences of containerization 
as they wasted hundreds of millions of dollars recon -
structing ports that were outmoded before the concrete 
was dry. The British government’s planning efforts led to 
the costly creation of new ports; officials never dreamed 
that a privately owned dock in an out- of- the- way town 
would turn itself into the country’s largest container ter-
minal overnight. Transportation regulators did little bet-
ter. Japan’s Ministry of Transport thought that it could 
avert overcapacity and keep Japanese ship lines profit-
able by forcing them to work together, only to be sur -
prised as ship rates in the Pacific tumbled. Regulators 
and politicians in America, desperate to preserve a sys-
386 • Chapter 15
tem that sought to protect shipbuilders, ship operators, 
truckers, and railroads, delayed reforms that could have 
allowed the container to reduce international shipping 
costs much earlier. By holding on to policies that suppos-
edly strengthened U.S. shipping with a panoply of subsi-
dies and restrictions meant to favor one interest group 
or another, they ultimately destroyed the competitiveness 
of the U.S.- flag fleet.4
The huge increase in long- distance trade that came in 
the container’s wake was foreseen by no one. When he 
studied the role of freight in the New York region in the 
late 1950s, Harvard economist Benjamin Chinitz pre -
dicted that containerization would favor metropolitan 
New York’s industrial base by letting the region’s facto-
ries ship to the South more cheaply than could plants in 
New England or the Midwest. Apparel, the region’s big-
gest manufacturing sector, would not be affected by 
changes in transport costs, because it was not “transport- 
sensitive.” The possibility that falling transport costs 
could decimate much of the U.S. manufacturing base by 
making it practical to ship almost everything long dis -
tances simply did not occur to him. Chinitz was hardly 
alone in failing to recognize the extent to which lower 
shipping costs would stimulate trade. Through the 1960s, 
study after study projected the growth of containerization 
by assuming that existing import and export trends would 
continue, with the cargo gradually being shifted into con-
tainers. The prospect that the container would permit a 
worldwide economic restructuring that would vastly in-
crease the flow of trade was not taken seriously.
5
“The market” got many things wrong when it came to 
the container, and so did “the state.” Both private- sector 
Adding Value • 387
and public- sector misjudgments slowed the growth of 
containerization and delayed the economic benefits it 
would bring. Yet in the end, the logic of shipping freight 
in containers was so compelling, the cost savings so enor-
mous, that the container took the world by storm. Sixty 
years after the Ideal- X, the equivalent of more than 300 
million 20- foot containers were making their way across 
the world’s oceans each year, with perhaps a fourth of 
them originating in China alone. Countless more were 
being shipped cross- border by truck or train.6
Containers had become ubiquitous—and in addition 
to cheap goods, they were bringing a new set of social 
problems. Stacks of abandoned containers, too beaten 
up to use, too expensive to repair, or simply unneeded, 
littered landscapes around the world. The exhaust of 
containerships and the trucks and trains serving them 
had become a massive environmental problem, and the 
endless growth of traffic in and out of expanding ports 
was subjecting nearby communities to congestion, noise, 
and high rates of cancer attributed to diesel emissions; 
the price tag for a cleanup in Los Angeles and Long 
Beach alone was estimated to be $11 billion. The flood 
of containers had become a major headache for security 
officials concerned that a single box, loaded with a ra -
dioactive “dirty” bomb timed to explode upon arrival in 
a major port, could contaminate an entire city and throw 
international commerce into chaos; radiation detectors 
went up at the gates to many terminals in an effort to 
keep terrorist containers from being loaded aboard ships. 
The use of containers outfitted with mattresses and toi-
lets to smuggle immigrants had become routine, with 
immigration inspectors unable to detect more than a tiny 
388 • Chapter 15
share of containers with human cargo among the hun-
dreds of thousands of boxes filled with legitimate goods.7
None of these problems, serious as they were, posed 
even a remote threat to the growth of container shipping. 
Containers themselves kept getting larger, with 48- foot 
and even 53- foot boxes allowing trucks to haul more 
freight on each trip. Although the world’s containership 
fleet declined in 2014 for the first time ever, that was only 
because older, smaller vessels were scrapped as much 
larger ones came into service. The total capacity of pure 
containerships more than doubled between 2005 and 
2015, far outstripping the growth of international trade 
and driving ocean freight rates to rock bottom. And 
ships themselves reached unprecedented size. In 2005, a 
ship able to carry 4,000 40- foot containers—8,000 
TEUs—was considered unusually large. Ten years later, 
ships of 20,000 TEUs had joined the world’s fleet, ships 
so large that a single one could carry 144 million bottles 
of wine. Even larger ones were on order.
Where vessel size had once been limited by the locks 
in the Panama Canal, containerships had grown so large 
that twenty- first- century naval architects were con -
strained by the Straits of Malacca, the busy shipping lane 
between Malaysia and Indonesia. If a containership ever 
reaches Malacca- Max, the maximum size for a vessel 
able to pass through the straits, it will be more than a 
quarter mile long and 210 feet wide, with its bottom at 
least 55 feet below the waterline. It may be uneconomi-
cal to build, because its width could require a structure 
of thicker steel, reducing cargo space. If such a vessel 
should sink, it could take nearly $2 billion of cargo with 
it. Its capacity will exceed 25,000 TEUs, or 12,500 stan-
Adding Value • 389
dard 40- foot containers, enough to fill a 120- mile line of 
trucks each time it arrives in port. Where it will call is a 
serious question, because few ports anywhere are deep 
enough to accommodate it. One answer might be brand- 
new ports built in deep water offshore, with Malacca- 
Max ships linking offshore platforms and smaller vessels 
or trains and trucks running atop causeways shuttling 
containers to land. Whether containerships and contain-
erports have reached their maximum efficient size, or 
even larger and costlier ships and ports could give rise to 
yet more economies of scale, making it still cheaper and 
easier to move goods around the globe, is a question of 
considerable consequence for the world economy.
8

Notes
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in the notes.
ASA American Standards Association
COHP Containerization Oral History Project, National 
Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC
GPO Government Printing Office
HQ headquarters
ICC United States Interstate Commerce Commission
ILA International Longshoremen’s Association
ILWU International Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s 
Union
ISO International Organization for Standardization
JOC Journal of Commerce
MACV Military Assistance Command Vietnam
Marad United States Maritime Administration
MCC Motor Carrier Cases
MH- 5 Materials Handling Sectional Committee 5
MSTS Military Sea Transportation Service
NACP National Archives at College Park, MD
NARA National Archives and Records Administration
NBER National Bureau of Economic Research
NYMA New York Municipal Archives
NYT New York Times
OAB/NHC Operational Archives Branch, Naval Historical 
Center, Washington, DC
OECD Organisation for Economic Co- operation and 
Development
PACECO Pacific Coast Engineering Company
392 • Notes to Pages 3–9
PANYNJ Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
PMA Pacific Maritime Association
PNYA Port of New York Authority
RG Record Group
ROHP Regional Oral History Program, Bancroft Library, 
University of California, Berkeley, CA
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development
VVA Virtual Vietnam Archive, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, 
TX, on- line at http://www.vietnam.ttu.edu/virtualarchive/
Chapter 1 
The World the Box Made
 1. Steven P. Erie, Globalizing L.A.: Trade, Infrastructure, and 
Regional Development (Stanford, 2004).
 2. Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization and 
the Gains from Variety,” Working Paper 10314, NBER, February 
2004.
 3. As Jefferson Cowie shows in a definitive case study, the relo-
cation of capital in search of lower production costs is not a new 
phenomenon; see Capital Moves: RCA’s Seventy- Year Quest for 
Cheap Labor (Ithaca, NY, 1999). The argument of this book is not 
that containerization initiated the geographic shift of industrial pro-
duction, but rather that it greatly increased the range of goods that 
can be manufactured economically at a distance from where they are 
consumed, the distances across which those products can feasibly be 
shipped, the punctuality with which that movement occurs, and the 
ability of manufacturers to combine inputs from widely dispersed 
sources to make finished products.
 4. For descriptions of life aboard a modern containership, see 
Richard Pollak, The Colombo Bay (New York, 2004), and Rose 
George, Ninety Percent of Everything (New York, 2013).
 5. Former U.S. Coast Guard commander Stephen E. Flynn esti-
mated in 2004 that it takes 5 agents 3 hours to completely inspect a 
loaded 40- foot container, so physically inspecting every box imported 
through Los Angeles and Long Beach on the average day in 2014 
would have required more than 300,000 man- hours. This equates to 
nearly 40,000 customs inspectors for those two ports alone. See the 
thorough discussion of ways to improve the security of container 
Notes to Pages 11–15 • 393
shipping in Flynn, America the Vulnerable: How the U.S. Has Failed 
to Secure the Homeland and Protect Its People from Terror (New 
York, 2004), chap. 5.
 6. Several factors make freight cost data particularly treacher -
ous. Average costs are greatly affected by the mix of cargo; the now 
defunct ICC used to report the average cost per ton- mile of rail 
freight, but year- to- year changes in the average depended mainly on 
demand for coal, which traveled at much lower rates per ton than 
manufactured goods. Second, most historical cost information con-
cerns a single aspect of the process—the ocean voyage between two 
ports—rather than the total door- to- door cost of a shipment. Third, 
a proper measure of freight costs over time would have to account 
for changes in service quality, such as faster ocean transit and re-
duced cargo theft, and no freight cost index does this. Fourth, a large 
number of freight shipments occur either within a large company or 
at prices privately negotiated between the shipper and transportation 
carriers, so the information required to measure costs economywide 
often is not publicly available. Edward L. Glaeser and Janet E. Kohl-
hase, “Cities, Regions, and the Decline of Transport Costs,” Working 
Paper 9886, NBER, July 2003, p. 4.
 7. U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee, Discriminatory 
Ocean Freight Rates and the Balance of Payments, November 19, 
1963 (Washington, DC, 1964), p. 333; John L. Eyre, “Shipping Con-
tainers in the Americas,” in Pan American Union, Recent Develop-
ments in the Use and Handling of Unitized Cargoes (Washington, 
DC, 1964), pp. 38–42. Eyre’s data were developed by the American 
Association of Port Authorities.
 8. Estimate of freight rates reaching 25 percent of value is in 
Douglas C. MacMillan and T. B. Westfall, “Competitive General 
Cargo Ships,” Transactions of the Society of Naval Architects and 
Marine Engineers 68 (1960): 843. Ocean freight rates for pipe and 
refrigerators are in Joint Economic Committee, Discriminatory 
Ocean Freight Rates, p. 342. Trade shares are taken from U.S. Bu-
reau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States (Wash-
ington, DC, 1975), p. 887.
 9. Eyre, “Shipping Containers in the Americas,” p. 40.
 10. Paul Krugman, “Growing World Trade: Causes and Conse-
quences,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1995, no. 1 
(1995): 341; World Trade Organization, World Trade Report 2004 
(Geneva, 2005), pp. 114–129. David Hummels, “Transportation 
394 • Notes to Pages 16–17
Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, no. 3 (2007): 152, asserts that 
“dramatic price declines are not in evidence as the result of contain-
erization.”
 11. Robert Greenhalgh Albion, The Rise of New York Port (New 
York, 1939; reprint, 1971), pp. 145–146; Peter L. Bernstein, Wed -
ding of the Waters: The Erie Canal and the Making of a Great Na-
tion (New York, 2005); Douglass North, “Ocean Freight Rates and 
Economic Development, 1750–1913,” Journal of Economic History 
18 (1958): 537–555. W. W. Rostow, among many others, argues that 
railroads were essential to the “takeoff” of U.S. growth in the 1840s 
and 1850s; see his Stages of Economic Growth (Cambridge, UK, 
1960), pp. 38–55. Alfred D. Chandler Jr., The Visible Hand: The 
Managerial Revolution in American Business (Cambridge, MA, 
1977), also assigns a critical role to railroads, although for very dif-
ferent reasons. Robert William Fogel, Railroads and American Eco-
nomic Growth (Baltimore, 1964), rejects Rostow’s view, asserting 
that “the railroad did not make an overwhelming contribution to the 
productive potential of the economy,” p. 235. Albert Fishlow also 
rejects Rostow’s claim that railroad construction was essential in 
stimulating American manufacturing, but contends that cheaper 
freight transportation had important effects on agriculture and led to 
a reorientation of regional economic relationships; see American 
Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante- bellum Economy 
(Cambridge, MA, 1965) as well as “Antebellum Regional Trade Re-
considered,” American Economic Review (1965 supplement): 352–
364. On the role of railroads in Chicago’s rise, see William Cronon, 
Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York, 1991), 
and Mary Yeager Kujovich, “The Refrigerator Car and the Growth 
of the American Dressed Beef Industry,” Business History Review 44 
(1970): 460–482. For an example from Britain, see Wray Vamplew, 
“Railways and the Transformation of the Scottish Economy,” Eco-
nomic History Review 24 (1971): 54. On transportation and urban 
development, see James Heilbrun, Urban Economics and Public 
Policy (New York, 1974), p. 32, and Edwin S. Mills and Luan Sendé, 
“Inner Cities,” Journal of Economic Literature 35 (1997): 731. On 
aviation, see Caroline Isard and Walter Isard, “Economic Implica-
tions of Aircraft,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 59 (1945): 145–
169.
 12. The seminal article along this line was Robert Solow, “Techni -
Notes to Pages 17–18 • 395
cal Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 39, no. 2 (1957): 65–94. On the problems of 
innovation, see Joel Mokyr, “Technological Inertia in Economic His-
tory,” Journal of Economic History 52 (1992): 325–338; Nathan 
Rosenberg, “On Technological Expectations,” Economic Journal 86, 
no. 343 (1976): 528; and Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin M. Hitt, “Be-
yond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Trans-
formation, and Business Performance,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 14, no. 4 (2000): 24. Electricity was first used in manufacturing 
in 1883; for discussion of its relatively slow acceptance in manufac-
turing, see Warren D. Devine Jr., “From Shafts to Wires: Historical 
Perspective on Electrification,” Journal of Economic History 43 
(1983): 347–372. Examples of the debate over computers include 
Paul A. David, “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Per-
spective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,” American Economic 
Review 80 (1990): 355–361; Stephen D. Oliner and Daniel E. Sichel, 
“The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s: Is Information Tech-
nology the Story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, no. 4 
(2000): 3–22; and Dale W. Jorgenson and Kevin J. Stiroh, “Informa-
tion Technology and Growth,” American Economic Review 89, no. 
2 (1999): 109–115.
 13. Paul M. Romer, “Why, Indeed, in America? Theory, History, 
and the Origins of Modern Economic Growth,” Working Paper 
5443, NBER, January 1996.
 14. David Ricardo, The Principles of Political Economy and Tax-
ation (London, 1821; reprint, New York, 1965), pp. 77–97. Richard 
E. Caves and Ronald W. Jones point out that the widely taught 
Heckscher- Ohlin model, which shows that a country has a compara-
tive advantage in producing goods that make more intensive uses of 
its more abundant factor of production, assumes that transport costs 
will not affect trade; see their World Trade and Payments: An Intro-
duction, 2nd ed. (Boston, 1977). More typically, Miltiades Chacho-
liades, Principles of International Economics (New York, 1981), p. 
333, describes international market equilibrium under the unstated 
assumption that trade is costless.
 15. The seminal article in this field was Paul Krugman, “Increas-
ing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Political Economy 
99, no. 3 (1991): 483–499. The impact of changing transportation 
costs is further developed in Krugman and Anthony J. Venables, 
“Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,” Quarterly Journal of 
396 • Notes to Pages 19–24
Economics 110, no. 4 (1995): 857–880, and in Masahisa Fujita, Paul 
Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables, The Spatial Economy: Cities, 
Regions, and International Trade (Cambridge, MA, 1999).
 16. David Hummels, “Have International Transportation Costs 
Declined?” Working Paper, University of Chicago Graduate School 
of Business, 1999, and the International Monetary Fund, World Eco-
nomic Outlook, September 2002, p. 116, contend that the cost of sea 
freight has not fallen significantly in recent decades. James E. Ander-
son and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 42 (September 2004): 691–751, and Céline Carrere and 
Maurice Schiff, “On the Geography of Trade: Distance Is Alive and 
Well,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3206, February 
2004, are among those arguing the continued significance of trans-
port costs in determining trade flows. David Coe and three coauthors 
offer a technical critique of those arguments and conclude that long- 
distance international trade has in fact increased, implying that lower 
transport costs may have encouraged globalization; see “The Missing 
Globalization Puzzle,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 
WP/02/171, October 2002. Daniel M. Bernhofen, Zouheir El- Sahli, 
and Richard Kneller, “Estimating the Effects of the Container Revo-
lution on World Trade,” CESifo working paper 4136, February 2013, 
assert the importance of the container in shifting trade patterns, as 
does Gisela Rua, “Diffusion of Containerization,” Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors Working Paper, October 2014.
 17. The closest approximation to a general history of the con-
tainer is Theodore O. Wallin, “The Development, Economics, and 
Impact of Technological Change in Transportation: The Case of 
Containerization” (Ph.D. diss., Cornell University, 1974). See also 
Brian Cudahy, Box Boats: How Container Ships Changed the World 
(New York, 2006), and Arthur Donovan and Joseph Bonney, The 
Box That Changed the World: Fifty Years of Container Shipping—
An Illustrated History (East Windsor, NJ, 2006).
Chapter 2 
Gridlock on the Docks
 1. Dramatic photos of cargo- handling operations on the West 
Coast, which were similar to those on the New York docks, can be 
found in Otto Hagel and Louis Goldblatt, Men and Machines: A 
Story about Longshoring on the West Coast Waterfront (San Fran-
Notes to Pages 24–28 • 397
cisco, 1963). Description of coffee handling is from Debra Bern-
hardt’s interview with Brooklyn longshoreman Peter Bell, August 29, 
1981, New Yorkers at Work Oral History Collection, Robert F. Wag-
ner Labor Archive, New York University, Tape 10A. See also recollec-
tion of former longshoreman Jock McDougal in Ian McDougall, 
Voices of Leith Dockers (Edinburgh, 2001), p. 28; recollection of 
former San Francisco longshoreman Bill Ward in the ILWU oral his-
tory collection, viewed July 5, 2004, at http://www.ilwu.org/history 
/oral-histories/bill-ward.cfm?renderforprint=1. Grace Line anecdote 
from interview with Andrew Gibson, Box AC NMAH 639, COHP.
 2. Alfred Pacini and Dominique Pons, Docker à Marseille (Paris, 
1996), p. 174; T. S. Simey, ed., The Dock Worker: An Analysis of 
Conditions of Employment in the Port of Manchester (Liverpool, 
1956), p. 199; New York Shipping Association, “Annual Accident 
Report Port of Greater New York and Vicinity,” January 15, 1951, in 
Vernon H. Jensen Papers, Collection 4067, Box 13, Folder “Accidents- 
Longshore Ind.”
 3. Charles R. Cushing, “The Development of Cargo Ships in the 
United States and Canada in the Last Fifty Years” (manuscript, Janu-
ary 8, 1992); Peter Elphick, Liberty: The Ships That Won the War 
(London, 2001), p. 403.
 4. Ward interview, ILWU; interview with former longshoreman 
George Baxter in McDougall, Voices of Leith Dockers, p. 44.
 5. See the colorful descriptions of unloading in Pacini and Pons, 
Docker à Marseille, p. 137.
 6. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
“Estimates of Non- Residential Fixed Assets, Detailed Industry by 
Detailed Cost,” available at http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/faweb/Details 
/Index.html; Andrew Gibson interview; Paul Richardson interview, 
July 1, 1997, Box ACNMAH 639, COHP. Cost estimate of merchant 
ships appears in the testimony of Geoffrey V. Azoy, Chemical Bank, 
in U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Merchant Marine 
and Fisheries, Hearings on HR 8637, To Facilitate Private Financing 
of New Ship Construction, April 27, 1954, p. 54. MacMillan and 
Westfall estimated that cargo handling and port expenses accounted 
for 51.8 percent of the total cost of a short voyage on a C2 freighter 
in 1958 and 35.9 percent of the total cost of a long voyage. “Com-
petitive General Cargo Ships,” p. 837.
 7. For examinations of dockworkers’ conditions in many coun-
tries, see Sam Davies et al., eds., Dock Workers: International Explo-
398 • Notes to Pages 29–31
rations in Comparative Labour History, 1790–1970 (Aldershot, UK, 
2000).
 8. U.S. Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Old- Age and Survi-
vors Insurance, County Business Patterns, First Quarter, 1951 (Wash-
ington, DC, 1953), p. 56; George Baxter interview in McDougall, 
Voices of Leith Dockers, p. 44; unnamed longshoreman quoted in 
William W. Pilcher, The Portland Longshoremen: A Dispersed Urban 
Community (New York, 1972), p. 41; Pacini and Pons, Docker à 
Marseille, p. 46; Paul T. Hartman, Collective Bargaining and Produc-
tivity (Berkeley, 1969), p. 26; David F. Wilson, Dockers: The Impact 
of Industrial Change (London, 1972), p. 23.
 9. Many of the problems on the docks were eloquently discussed 
in the 1951 report of a New York State Board of Inquiry into water-
front conditions; for a summary, see New York State Department of 
Labor, “Employment Conditions in the Longshore Industry,” New 
York State Department of Labor Industrial Bulletin 31, no. 2 (1952): 
7. ILA president Joseph P. Ryan, who eventually lost his post owing 
to charges of corruption, proposed in 1951 that employers should 
offer loans to his men to give them an alternative to loan sharks; see 
“Ryan Message to Members 1951” in Jensen Papers, Collection 
4067, Box 13, Folder “Bibliography—Longshoremen Study Out-
lines,” and Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, Annual 
Report, various years. Mullman’s testimony is reported in “Newark 
Kickback Inquiry,” NYT, December 16, 1954. On mandatory bet-
ting, see Paul Trilling, “Memorandum and Recommendations on the 
New York Waterfront,” December 14, 1951, in Jensen Papers, Col-
lection 4067, Box 12, Folder “Appendix Materials.” Information on 
New Orleans taken from Eric Arnesen, Waterfront Workers of New 
Orleans: Race, Class, and Politics, 1863–1923 (New York, 1991), p. 
254.
 10. Some of these schemes are reviewed in Peter Turnbull, “Con-
testing Globalization on the Waterfront,” Politics and Society 28, no. 
3 (2000): 367–391, and in Vernon H. Jensen, Hiring of Dock Work-
ers and Employment Practices in the Ports of New York, Liverpool, 
London, Rotterdam, and Marseilles (Cambridge, MA, 1964), pp. 
153, 200, and 227. On Rotterdam, see also Erik Nijhof, “Des jour -
naliers respectables: Les dockers de Rotterdam et leurs syndicates 
1880–1965,” in Dockers de la Méditerranée à la Mer du Nord (Avi-
gnon, 1999), p. 121.
 11. Wilson, Dockers, p. 34.
Notes to Pages 31–33 • 399
 12. In Amsterdam and Rotterdam, most dockworkers were in the 
direct employ of stevedoring firms, and most dockers who were not 
in full- time employment received guarantees of 80 percent of regular 
pay if they reported to the hiring center twice daily; on average, they 
received 39 hours’ wages and 9 hours of guarantee per 48- hour 
workweek. See untitled typescript from Scheefvaart Vereeniging 
Noord, dated May 1, 1953, in Jensen Papers, Collection 4067, Box 
13, Folder “Reports on Foreign Dock Workers.” On the UK pension 
scheme, see Wilson, Dockers, p. 118. On Hamburg, see Klaus Wein-
hauer, “Dock Labour in Hamburg: The Labour Movement and In-
dustrial Relations, 1880s–1960s,” in Davies et al., Dock Workers, 
2:501.
 13. Raymond Charles Miller, “The Dockworker Subculture and 
Some Problems in Cross- Cultural and Cross- Time Generalizations,” 
Comparative Studies in Society and History 11, no. 3 (1969): 302–
314. For belief that it did not pay to work well and quickly, see Horst 
Jürgen Helle, “Der Hafenarbeiter zwischen Segelschiff und Vollbe-
schäftigung,” Economisch en Sociaal Tijdschrift 19, no. 4 (1965): 
270. Oregon comments in Pilcher, The Portland Longshoremen, p. 
22. Marseilles dockers went on strike in 1955 to demand regular 
shifts. See Pacini and Pons, Docker à Marseille, p. 118. According to 
data from the British Ministry of Labour, the base weekly pay of a 
full- time docker before World War II was 30–40 percent above the 
corresponding pay in construction and heavy manufacturing; dock-
ers’ average weekly earnings, however, were only 10 percent higher 
than in those other sectors, because dockers’ work was more spo-
radic. See Wilson, Dockers, p. 19.
 14. Richard Sasuly, “Why They Stick to the ILA,” Monthly Re-
view, January 1956, 370; Simey, The Dock Worker, pp. 44–45; Mal-
colm Tull, “Waterfront Labour at Fremantle, 1890–1990,” in Davies 
et al., Dock Workers, 2:482; U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S. Census 
of Population and Housing, 1960 (Washington, DC, 1962), Report 
104, Part I.
 15. The proportion of African American dockworkers is from 
census data reported in Lester Rubin, The Negro in the Longshore 
Industry (Philadelphia, 1974), pp. 34–44. For a detailed analysis of 
racial preferences and discrimination among dockworkers in New 
York, New Orleans, and California, see Bruce Nelson, Divided We 
Stand: American Workers and the Struggle for Black Equality 
(Princeton, 2001), chaps. 1–3. On the New Orleans dockers, see 
400 • Notes to Pages 34–35
Daniel Rosenberg, New Orleans Dockworkers: Race, Labor, and 
Unionism, 1892–1923 (Albany, 1988), and Arnesen, Waterfront 
Workers of New Orleans. Odd details, carefully omitting any men-
tion of race, are in William Z. Ripley, “A Peculiar Eight Hour Prob-
lem,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 33, no. 3 (1919): 555–559. 
On racial discrimination, see Robin D. G. Kelley, “ ‘We Are Not What 
We Seem’: Rethinking Black Working- Class Opposition in the Jim 
Crow South,” Journal of American History 80, no. 1 (1993): 96; 
Seaton Wesley Manning, “Negro Trade Unionists in Boston,” Social 
Forces 17, no. 2 (1938): 259; Roderick N. Ryon, “An Ambiguous 
Legacy: Baltimore Blacks and the CIO, 1936–1941,” Journal of 
Negro History 65, no. 1 (1980): 27; Clyde W. Summers, “Admission 
Policies of Labor Unions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 61, no. 1 
(1946): 98; Wilson, Dockers, p. 29. The Portland grain workers’ case 
is mentioned in Charles P. Larrowe, Harry Bridges: The Rise and Fall 
of Radical Labor in the United States (New York, 1972), p. 368.
 16. On Portland, see Pilcher, The Portland Longshoremen, p. 17; 
on Antwerp, see Helle, “Der Hafenarbeiter,” p. 273; for Edinburgh, 
see interviews with dockers Eddie Trotter and Tom Ferguson in Mc-
Dougall, Voices of Leith Dockers, pp. 132 and 177; for Manchester, 
see Simey, The Dock Worker, p. 48. Macmillan quotation appears in 
Wilson, Dockers, p. 160.
 17. On the docker culture, see Pilcher, The Portland Longshore-
men, pp. 12 and 25–26; Wilson, Dockers , p. 53; and Miller, “The 
Dockworker Subculture,” passim. Rankings are reported in John 
Hall and D. Caradog Jones, “Social Grading of Occupations,” British 
Journal of Sociology 1 (1950): 31–55.
 18. Wilson, Dockers, pp. 101–102; Clark Kerr and Abraham Sie-
gel, “The Interindustry Propensity to Strike—an International Com-
parison,” in Industrial Conflict, ed. Arthur Kornhauser, Robert Dub-
lin, and Arthur M. Ross (New York, 1954), p. 191; Miller, “The 
Dockworker Subculture,” p. 310. The most notable exception to 
labor militancy was in New York, where, as Nelson shows, a combi-
nation of corrupt union leadership and appeals to Irish Catholic 
solidarity against other ethnic groups undermined labor radicalism 
and allowed the port to operate without a strike between 1916 and 
1945; see Nelson, Divided We Stand, pp. 64–71. For a fictional de-
piction of dockworker militancy, see Tony Kushner’s 2009 play The 
Intelligent Homosexual’s Guide to Socialism and Capitalism with 
the Key to the Scriptures.
Notes to Pages 36–40 • 401
 19. Rupert Lockwood, Ship to Shore: A History of Melbourne’s 
Waterfront and Its Union Struggles (Sydney, 1990), pp. 223–225; 
Arnesen, Waterfront Workers of New Orleans, p. 254; David F. Sel-
vin, A Terrible Anger (Detroit, 1996), pp. 41 and 48–52; Pacini and 
Pons, Docker à Marseille, pp. 46 and 174; interview with former 
longshoreman Tommy Morton in McDougall, Voices of Leith Dock-
ers, p. 112.
 20. Thievery as a response to reductions in pay is discussed in 
Selvin, A Terrible Anger, p. 54. The docker joke is one of several in 
Wilson, Dockers, p. 53. Theft is discussed, among many other places, 
in the interview with longshoreman Tommy Morton in McDougall, 
Voices of Leith Dockers, p. 115; and in Pilcher, The Portland Long-
shoremen, p. 100.
 21. The welt had originated as a way to give longshoremen a 
break when they were working in refrigerated holds, but it spread to 
general cargo in Liverpool and in Glasgow, where it was known as 
“spelling.” See Wilson, Dockers, pp. 215 and 221. For productivity, 
see Miller, “The Dock- worker Subculture,” p. 311; MacMillan and 
Westfall, “Competitive General Cargo Ships,” p. 842; Wilson, Dock-
ers, p. 308; and William Finlay, Work on the Waterfront: Worker 
Power and Technological Change in a West Coast Port (Philadelphia, 
1988), p. 53.
 22. See the two interesting excerpts of articles on containers from 
1920 and 1921 in “Uniform Containerization of Freight: Early Steps 
in the Evolution of an Idea,” Business History Review 43, no. 1 
(1969): 84.
 23. For early efforts to promote containers in America, see G. C. 
Woodruff, “The Container Car as the Solution of the Less Than Car-
load Lot Problem,” speech to Associated Industries of Massachusetts, 
October 23, 1929, and “Freight Container Service,” speech to Traffic 
Club of New York, March 25, 1930. A prescient summary of the 
possibilities of containerization, including the potential economic 
benefits to the public, is in Robert C. King, George M. Adams, and G. 
Lloyd Wilson, “The Freight Container as a Contribution to Efficiency 
in Transportation,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science 187 (1936): 27–36.
 24. The ICC ruling requiring commodity- based rates can be 
found at 173 ICC 448. The North Shore Line’s rates are discussed in 
ICC Docket 21723, June 6, 1931. On the implications of the ICC 
case, see Donald Fitzgerald, “A History of Containerization in the 
402 • Notes to Pages 41–46
California Maritime Industry: The Case of San Francisco” (Ph.D. 
diss., University of California at Santa Barbara, 1986), pp. 15–20.
 25. On Australia, see photo in Lockwood, Ship to Shore, p. 379. 
On early containerization in Europe, see Wilson, Dockers , p. 137, 
and René Borruey, Le port de Marseille: Du dock au conteneur, 
1844–1974 (Marseilles, 1994), pp. 296–306. Examples of North 
American ship lines carrying containers are in H. E. Stocker, “Cargo 
Handling and Stowage,” Society of Naval Architects and Marine En-
gineers, November 1933. Information about the Central of Georgia 
comes from George W. Jordan, personal correspondence, November 
15, 1997. See also “Steel Containers,” Via—Port of New York, July 
1954, pp. 1–5.
 26. Containers: Bulletin of the International Container Bureau, 
no. 5 (June 1951): 12 and 68; Fitzgerald, “A History of Containeriza-
tion,” p. 35; Padraic Burke, A History of the Port of Seattle (Seattle, 
1976), p. 115; Lucille McDonald, “Alaska Steam: A Pictorial History 
of the Alaska Steamship Company,” Alaska Geographic 11, no. 4 
(1984).
 27. Pierre- Edouard Cangardel, “The Present Development of the 
Maritime Container,” Containers, no. 35 (June 1966): 13 (author’s 
translation). Container census data appear in Containers, no. 13 
(June 1955): 9, and no. 2 (December 1949): 65. Belgian example ap-
pears in Containers, no. 19 (December 1957): 18 and 39.
 28. Peter Bell interview discussed handling of early containers. 
The “hindrance” comment by Waldemar Isbrandtsen of Isbrandtsen 
Company is in International Cargo Handling Coordination Associa-
tion, “Containerization Symposium Proceedings, New York City, 
June 15, 1955,” p. 11, and the comment about forklifts by Frank 
McCarthy of Bull- Insular Line is on p. 19. See also presentation by 
A. Vicenti, president, Union of Cargo Handlers in the Ports of France, 
Containers, no. 12 (December 1954): 20. Levy address appears in 
Containers, no. 1 (April 1949): 48 (author’s translation). Customs 
duties posed an obstacle as well: until an agreement in 1956, receiv-
ing countries frequently levied duties on the value of an arriving con-
tainer as well as its contents. Containers, no. 33 (June 1965): 18. The 
military study is reported in National Research Council, Maritime 
Cargo Transportation Conference, Transportation of Subsistence to 
NEAC (Washington, DC, 1956), p. 5.
 29. U.S. National Research Council, Maritime Cargo Transporta -
tion Conference, The SS Warrior (Washington, DC, 1954), p. 21.
Notes to Pages 46–54 • 403
 30. U.S. National Research Council, Maritime Cargo Transporta -
tion Conference, Cargo Ship Loading (Washington, DC, 1957), p. 28.
Chapter 3 
The Trucker
 1. Fitzgerald, “A History of Containerization,” pp. 30–31.
 2. North Carolina: A Guide to the Old North State (Chapel 
Hill, 1939), p. 537; Robesonian, February 26, 1951.
 3. Malcolm P. McLean, “Opportunity Begins at Home,” Ameri-
can Magazine 149 (May 1950): 21; News and Observer (Raleigh), 
February 16, 1942, p. 7; Robesonian, February 26, 1951.
 4. McLean, “Opportunity,” p. 122.
 5. For detail on McLean Trucking’s early history, see “Malcolm 
P. McLean, Jr., Common Carrier Application,” ICC Motor Carrier 
Cases (hereafter MCC) at 30 MCC 565 (1941). McLean’s attempt to 
block his competitors’ merger was decided in McLean Trucking Co. 
v. U.S., 321 U.S. 67, January 14, 1944. McLean’s new service was 
approved in September 1944; 43 MCC 820. McLean’s first purchase, 
of McLeod’s Transfer Inc., occurred in 1942 and was approved over 
the objections of three protestants; 38 MCC 807. He acquired an-
other trucking company, American Trucking, late in the war; 40 
MCC 841 (1946). Revenue figure for 1946 appears at 48 MCC 43 
(1948).
 6. Intercity truck lines handled 30.45 billion ton- miles of freight 
in 1946. By 1950, they were carrying 65.65 billion. See ICC, Trans-
port Economics, December 1957, p. 9. Total railroad ton- miles were 
unchanged over that period. Railroads’ revenues per ton- mile be-
tween 1942 and 1956 varied between 23 percent and 26.8 percent 
those of truckers. Transport Economics, November 1957, p. 8.
 7. Information about managing under ICC oversight from au-
thor’s interview with Paul Richardson, Holmdel, NJ, January 14, 
1992.
 8. M.P. McLean, Jr.—Control; McLean Trucking Co.—Lease—
Atlantic States Motor Lines Incorporated, ICC No. MC- F- 3300, 45 
MCC 417; M.P. McLean, Jr.—Control; McLean Trucking Company, 
Inc.—Purchase (Portion)—Garford Trucking, Inc., ICC No. MC- F- 
3698, 50 MCC 415.
 9. The cigarette case is Cigarettes and Tobacco from North Car -
olina Points to Atlanta, 48 MCC 39 (1948).
404 • Notes to Pages 55–60
 10. Author’s interviews with Paul Richardson, Holmdel, NJ, July 
20, 1992, and Walter Wriston, New York, June 30, 1992. McLean’s 
success in using his management techniques to turn around Carolina 
Motor Express, a troubled company of which he had assumed tem-
porary control in 1952, is detailed in M.P. McLean, Jr.—Control; 
McLean Trucking Company—Control—Carolina Motor Express 
Lines, Inc. (Earl R. Cox, Receiver), 70 MCC 279 (1956).
 11. M.P. McLean, Jr.—Control; McLean Trucking Co.—Lease—
Atlantic States Motor Lines Incorporated, 45 MCC 417; M.P. Mc-
Lean, Jr.—Control; McLean Trucking Company, Inc.—Purchase 
(Portion)—Garford Trucking, Inc., 50 MCC 415; ICC, Transport 
Statistics in the United States 1954, Part 7, Table 30; Wriston inter-
view.
 12. Author’s telephone interview with William B. Hubbard, July 
1, 1993.
 13. Author’s telephone interview with Earl Hall, May 12, 1993; 
author’s telephone interview with Robert N. Campbell, June 25, 
1993.
 14. The first public notice of the container scheme appeared in 
A. H. Raskin, “Union Head Backs ‘Sea- Land’ Trucks,” NYT, Febru-
ary 17, 1954.
 15. PANYNJ, Foreign Trade 1976 (New York, 1977), p. 23; au-
thor’s interview with Paul Richardson, Holmdel, NJ, July 20, 1992; 
PNYA, Weekly Report to Commissioners, March 13, 1954, 16, in 
Doig Files; PNYA, Minutes of Committee on Port Planning, April 8, 
1954, 2, in Meyner Papers, Box 43.
 16. Pan- Atlantic Steamship Corporation, “Summary of Post–
World War II Coastwise Operations,” mimeo, n.d.; Wriston inter -
view; Phillip L. Zweig, Wriston: Walter Wriston, Citibank, and the 
Rise and Fall of American Financial Supremacy (New York, 1995), p. 
78.
 17. The details of this convoluted transaction are reviewed in 
ICC, Case No. MC- F- 5976, McLean Trucking Company and Pan- 
Atlantic Steamship Corporation—Investigation of Control, July 8, 
1957.
 18. McLean’s net worth as of September 1955 appears in “I.C.C. 
Aide Urges Waterman Sale,” NYT, November 28, 1956. McLean 
quotation is from author’s interview with Gerald Toomey, New York, 
May 5, 1993.
Notes to Pages 61–64 • 405
 19. Wriston interview. The McLean quotation is from Zweig, 
who interviewed McLean for Wriston, p. 79.
 20. Wriston interview; Zweig, Wriston, p. 81; Janet Berte Neale, 
“America’s Maritime Innovator,” program for AOTOS Award 1984. 
Many of the relevant financial details were not included in McLean 
Industries’ financial reports.
 21. McLean Industries, Annual Report for the year ending De-
cember 31, 1955.
 22. The program of which McLean took advantage was intended 
to help traditional ship lines, not upstart challengers. As Andrew 
Gibson and Arthur Donovan point out, “It took an innovator from 
another sector of the transportation industry to see how the trade- in 
program, designed to renew the subsidized fleet, could be used to 
help launch a revolution that eventually transformed the entire in-
dustry.” See their The Abandoned Ocean: A History of United States 
Maritime Policy (Columbia, SC, 2000), p. 176.
 23. “Railroads Assail Sea- Trailer Plan,” NYT, February 11, 1955; 
ICC, McLean Trucking Company and Pan- Atlantic Steamship Cor-
poration—Investigation of Control; McLean Industries, Annual Re-
port, 1955, pp. 5 and 11; U.S. Department of Commerce, Annual 
Report of the Federal Maritime Board and Maritime Administration, 
1955 (Washington, DC, 1955), p. 14, and 1956 (Washington, DC, 
1956), p. 7; K. W. Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization: From the Be-
ginning through Standardization” (paper presented to World Port 
Conference, Rotterdam, 1982); “T- 2’s Will ‘Piggy Back’ Truck Trail-
ers,” Marine Engineering/Log (1956), p. 83. Cost analysis from au-
thor’s interview with Guy F. Tozzoli, New York, January 13, 2004.
 24. Pan- Atlantic gave up the idea of building roll on–roll off ships 
by late 1956, supposedly to save money on construction costs and to 
gain greater flexibility. See “Pan Atlantic Changes Plans for Roll- On 
Ships,” Marine Engineering/Log (December 1956), p. 112.
 25. Much of this section is drawn from Tantlinger, “U.S. Contain -
erization”; author’s telephone interview with Keith Tantlinger, De-
cember 1, 1992; and author’s interview with Keith Tantlinger, San 
Diego, January 3, 1993. These containers were designed for Ocean 
Van Lines and carried, 36 to a barge, by Alaska Freight Lines be-
tween Seattle, Anchorage, and Seward. They are distinct from the 
much smaller steel “Cargo Guard” boxes first used by Alaska Steam-
ship Company in 1953 and the 12- foot wooden “crib boxes” that 
406 • Notes to Pages 65–75
Alaska Steamship carried aboard the Susitna, which some identify as 
the first containership. See Tippetts- Abbett- McCarthy- Stratton, Sho-
reside Facilities for Trailership, Trainship, and Containership Services 
(Washington, DC, 1956), p. 45; McDonald, “Alaska Steam,” p. 112; 
and Burke, A History of the Port of Seattle, p. 115.
 26. Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization”; author’s interview with 
Keith Tantlinger, January 3, 1993; author’s telephone interview with 
Earl Hall, May 14, 1993.
 27. The spreader bar is covered by U.S. Patent 2,946,617, issued 
July 26, 1960.
 28. Information about delays taken from Tantlinger interview, 
and the announcement of the start date is in “Tank Vessels Begin 
Trailer Runs in April,” JOC, February 19, 1956. Houston comment 
is cited in Marc Felice, “The Pioneer,” article appearing in program 
for the AOTOS Award 1984. For cost figures, see Pierre Bonnot, 
“Prospective Study of Unit Loads,” Containers, no. 36 (December 
1956): 25–29.
 29. Pan- Atlantic Steamship Corporation, “Summary of Opera-
tions.”
 30. “ICC Aide Urges Waterman Sale,” NYT, November 28, 1956, 
p. 70; ICC, McLean Trucking Company and Pan- Atlantic Steamship 
Corporation—Investigation of Control.
 31. Borruey, Le port de Marseille, p. 296. Fitzgerald, “A History 
of Containerization,” p. 2. For photos of Seatrain’s vessels on trial in 
1928, see Fairplay, June 17, 1976, p. 15.
 32. Cangardel, “The Present Development of the Maritime Con-
tainer.”
Chapter 4 
The System
 1. Author’s telephone interview with Robert N. Campbell, June 
25, 1993.
 2. Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization”; Cushing, “The Develop-
ment of Cargo Ships.”
 3. The containers, chassis, refrigerated units, and twist locks all 
are covered by patent 3,085,707, issued after much delay on April 
16, 1963.
 4. Campbell interview; Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization.” Skagit 
Notes to Pages 76–84 • 407
Steel and Iron was closed in the early 1990s, and most of the com-
pany’s records were destroyed.
 5. Marine Engineering/Log (November 1955), p. 104; Tant-
linger, “U.S. Containerization”; PNYA, Minutes of Committee on 
Operations, February 2, 1956, Meyner Papers, Box 44; Paul F. Van 
Wicklen, “New York—The Port That Gave Containerization Its 
Oomph,” in Containerization and Intermodal Institute, Container-
ization: The First 25 Years (New York, 1981); “Tanker to Carry 2- 
Way Loads,” NYT, April 27, 1956. The conversion of the C- 2s is 
discussed in “Full- Scale Container Ship Proves Itself,” Marine Engi-
neering/Log (December 1957), p. 67, and in author’s telephone inter-
view with Robert N. Campbell, June 25, 1993. Bonner quotation 
appears in McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1957, p. 8.
 6. McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1957 and 1958.
 7. McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1958; Campbell inter -
view.
 8. Author’s telephone interview with Earl Hall, October 2, 
1992; author’s telephone interview with William Hubbard, July 1, 
1993; author’s interview with Charles Cushing, New York, April 7, 
1993.
 9. William L. Worden, Cargoes: Matson’s First Century in the 
Pacific (Honolulu, 1981), p. 120.
 10. Ibid., pp. 114–120; Fitzgerald, “A History of Containeriza-
tion,” pp. 39–41.
 11. Matson’s caution was described in author’s telephone inter -
view with Leslie A. Harlander, November 2, 2004. Observation 
about hiding pedigrees is from Cushing interview. On Weldon’s back-
ground, see statement of Matson president Stanley Powell Jr., U.S. 
House of Representatives, Committee on Merchant Marine and 
Fisheries, Cargo Container Dimensions, November 1, 1967, pp. 48–
49. Weldon comment appears in his “Cargo Containerization in the 
West Coast–Hawaiian Trade,” Operations Research 6 (September–
October 1958): 650.
 12. Weldon, “Cargo Containerization,” pp. 652–655.
 13. Ibid., pp. 661–663.
 14. Les Harlander, interview by Arthur Donovan and Andrew 
Gibson, June 19, 1997, COHP.
 15. Harlander interview, COHP; letter, Keith Tantlinger to 
George D. Saunders, December 3, 1992 (copy in possession of au-
408 • Notes to Pages 85–90
thor). In the letter, Tantlinger states, “I caught Les Harlander prowl-
ing the vessel to apparently see what he could learn, and I asked him 
to leave the ship.” In a telephone interview with the author, Novem-
ber 2, 2004, Harlander recalled that he had visited the ship as a guest 
of Pan- Atlantic.
 16. Harlander interview, COHP; American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, The PACECO Container Crane, brochure prepared for 
dedication of national historic mechanical engineering landmark, Al-
ameda, California, May 5, 1983. Details of the antiswing device are 
in L. A. Harlander, “Engineering Development of a Container System 
for the West Coast–Hawaiian Trade,” Transactions of the Society of 
Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 68 (1960): 1079.
 17. Harlander interview, COHP; Harlander, “Engineering Devel-
opment,” p. 1053. The containers apparently were well made; in 
1981, 23 years after they were built, 85 percent of the original pro-
duction run of 600 containers were still in service. Harlander inter -
view, COHP.
 18. Negotiations with PACECO are recounted in Harlander in-
terview, COHP; the lashing system is described in Harlander, “Engi-
neering Development,” p. 1084.
 19. Foster Weldon, “Operational Simulation of a Freighter Fleet,” 
in National Research Council, Research Techniques in Marine Trans-
portation, Publication 720 (Washington, DC, 1959), pp. 21–27.
 20. Fitzgerald, “A History of Containerization,” p. 47; American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, The PACECO Container Crane.
 21. Leslie A. Harlander, “Further Developments of a Container 
System for the West Coast–Hawaiian Trade,” Transactions of the So-
ciety of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 69 (1961): 7–14; 
Fitzgerald, “A History of Containerization,” pp. 57–59; Worden, 
Cargoes, pp. 143–144.
 22. Benjamin Chinitz, for example, devoted only a couple of men -
tions to containerization, predicting in 1960 that “in the next few 
decades” few places would have piggyback (container on railcar) ser-
vice and even fewer would have maritime service with containers; see 
Freight and the Metropolis: The Impact of America’s Transport Rev-
olution on the New York Region (Cambridge, MA, 1960), pp. 83, 86, 
and 161. Jerome L. Goldman, “Designed to Cut Cargo- Handling 
Costs,” Marine Engineering/Log (1958), p. 43; McLean Industries, 
Annual Reports, 1957–60; Campbell interview; John Niven, Ameri-
can President Lines and Its Forebears, 1848–1984 (Newark, DE, 
Notes to Pages 91–95 • 409
1987), p. 211. Grace’s plans were described in U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Annual Report of the Federal Maritime Board and Mar-
itime Administration, 1958, p. 4; Edward A. Morrow, “All- Container 
Ship Welcomed by Port on Her Debut,” NYT, January 13, 1960; 
John P. Callahan, “Container Vessel on First Run,” NYT, January 30, 
1960; “Grace Initiates Seatainer Service,” Marine Engineering/Log 
(1960), p. 55; Harold B. Meyers, “The Maritime Industry’s Expen-
sive New Box,” Fortune, November 1967. The ILA may have been 
behind Venezuelan dockers’ refusal to handle Grace’s containers; see 
George Panitz, “NY Dockers Map Annual Wage Drive,” JOC, De -
cember 20, 1961.
 23. PNYA, Annual Report, various years; “Puerto Rico Trailer 
Service,” NYT, April 22, 1960; “Bull Line Gets Container Ships,” 
NYT, May 5, 1961; “Transport News: Sea- Land Service,” NYT, De-
cember 17, 1959. Financial information for Pan- Atlantic and Sea- 
Land Service is from ICC, Transport Statistics, Part 5, Table 4, vari-
ous years. For the parent company’s losses, see McLean Industries, 
Annual Report, 1960. Gerald Toomey, then with Consolidated 
Freightways, a large truck line, recalled that Consolidated’s chairman 
predicted in 1962 that Sea- Land would not last two years; author’s 
interview, New York, May 5, 1993.
 24. Edward A. Morrow, “Seatrain Spurns Shipping Merger,” 
NYT, August 12, 1959; Campbell interview; McLean Industries, An-
nual Report, 1958.
 25. “Just recruiting” comment from author’s interview with Ger -
ald P. Toomey, May 5, 1993. On use of intelligence and personality 
tests, see Arthur Donovan and Andrew Gibson interview with Scott 
Morrison, July 8, 1998, COHP. Comment on pitching pennies from 
Cushing interview, April 7, 1993.
 26. Author’s interview with Paul Richardson, Holmdel, NJ, Janu-
ary 14, 1992; author’s telephone interview with Kenneth Younger, 
December 16, 1991; author’s telephone interview with William Hub-
bard, July 1, 1993.
 27. Container tonnage from PNYA Annual Reports. Quotation is 
from author’s interview with naval architect Charles Cushing, who 
joined Sea- Land in 1960.
 28. Sea- Land Service, presentation to Sea- Land management 
meeting, Hotel Astor, New York, December 12–14, 1963, mimeo.
 29. Werner Baer, “Puerto Rico: An Evaluation of a Successful De-
velopment Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 73, no. 4 
410 • Notes to Pages 95–99
(1959): 645–671; A. W. Maldonado, Teodoro Moscoso and Puerto 
Rico’s Operation Bootstrap (Gainesville, 1997).
 30. Author’s interview with Gerald Toomey, May 5, 1993; au-
thor’s interview with William B. Hubbard, July 1, 1993; Edward A. 
Morrow, “U.S. Antitrust Inquiry Begun into Proposed Sale of Bull 
Lines,” NYT, March 29, 1961.
 31. Sea- Land’s practice was to write off its ships over six years, an 
unusually short period for long- lived assets. Very high write- offs 
made the short- term profit picture look bleak, but it meant that Sea- 
Land could report very high profits a few years later, once the ships 
had been fully depreciated. This accounting, deliberately designed to 
depress short- term profitability, was not widely appreciated by ana-
lysts who examined the company’s financial reports. In the mid- 
1960s, the Internal Revenue Service forced Sea- Land to depreciate its 
ships over fifteen years instead of six, and its financial reporting be-
came less obscure. Author’s telephone interview with Earl Hall, May 
21, 1993, and McLean Industries Annual Report, 1965. Concerning 
the bid for Bull Line, see George Home, “Bull Steamship Company 
Sold to Manuel Kulukundis Interests,” NYT, April 22, 1961; Edward 
A. Morrow, “Decision Put Off in Bull Line Case,” NYT, August 4, 
1961. The attempt to block the sale of the ships to Bull was one of 
the more embarrassing episodes of McLean’s career. He told a hastily 
called congressional hearing on the issue that the government pro-
gram to sell old vessels to nonsubsidized ship lines was a “give- away 
program,” and was then forced to admit that Waterman had applied 
for ships under the same program; the Waterman application, he 
said, was “a mistake,” although one that he had not tried to correct. 
“M’Lean Attacks Ship Exchanges,” NYT, August 17, 1961.
 32. “Bull Line Stops Puerto Rico Runs,” NYT, June 25, 1962; 
“Sea- Land to Add to Trailer Runs,” NYT, June 26, 1962; author’s 
interview with Gerald Toomey, May 5, 1993; author’s interview with 
William B. Hubbard, July 1, 1993; author’s telephone interview with 
Amadeo Francis, April 28, 2005.
 33. Toomey interview; U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract, 
various issues.
 34. Sea- Land Service, “The Importance of Containerized Ocean 
Transportation Service to Puerto Rico,” mimeo, n.d. [1969].
 35. McLean Industries, Annual Reports , 1962 and 1965; Cushing 
interview; McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1962; Toomey inter -
view.
Notes to Pages 99–104 • 411
 36. Employment figures from ICC, Transport Statistics, 1963, 
Part 5, Table 4. Author’s interview with Richard Healey, January 19, 
1994; Toomey interview, Richardson interview, July 12, 1992; Hub-
bard interview.
 37. “It wasn’t unusual” from Healey interview; Campbell inter -
view; Hubbard interview; Richardson interview, January 14, 1992; 
George Panitz, “Sea- Land Plans Alaska Service,” JOC, April 1, 1964.
 38. Hall interview; presentations to Sea- Land management meet-
ing, Hotel Astor, New York, December 12–14, 1963; ICC, Transport 
Statistics, various issues.
Chapter 5 
The Battle for New York’s Port
 1. Chinitz, Freight and the Metropolis, pp. 21, 50. The number 
of piers is given in a letter from Edward F. Cavanagh Jr., New York 
City commissioner of marine and aviation, to Board of Inquiry on 
Longshore Work Stoppage, January 14, 1952, in Jensen Papers, Col-
lection 4067, Box 16. For a description of the New Jersey freight 
yards, see Carl W. Condit, The Port of New York, vol. 2, The History 
of the Rail and Terminal System from the Grand Central Electrifica-
tion to the Present (Chicago, 1981), pp. 103–107. Attempts by New 
Jersey interests to eliminate the single rate led to the formation of the 
PNYA in 1921. See Jameson W. Doig, Empire on the Hudson: Entre-
preneurial Vision and Political Power at the Port of New York Au-
thority (New York, 2001).
 2. Estimates of truck share of total cargo are based on unpub-
lished PNYA data cited in Chinitz, Freight and the Metropolis, p. 41. 
Average waiting time appears in PNYA, “Proposal for Development 
of the Municipally Owned Waterfront and Piers of New York City,” 
February 10, 1948, p. 64; NYT, May 17, 1952.
 3. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, Annual Report 
for the Year Ended June 30, 1954, p. 33, and Annual Report for the 
Year Ended June 30, 1955, p. 13. Interesting light on the union’s view 
of public loaders can be found in a July 28, 1952, letter from Wald-
man & Waldman, the ILA’s counsel, to ILA president Joseph P. Ryan 
recommending changes in the operation of Local 1757, in Vertical 
File, “International Longshoremen’s Association,” Tamiment Library, 
New York University. A formal list of “authorized” public loader 
charges appears in Truck Loading Authority, “Official Loading 
412 • Notes to Pages 105–109
Charges in the Port of New York,” in Jensen Papers, Collection 4067, 
Box 13. As late as 1963, the trucking industry complained that truck-
ers spent $1 million a year on bribes to gain precedence in waiting 
lines at piers. See New York City Council on Port Development and 
Promotion, minutes of November 18, 1963, Wagner Papers, Reel 
40532, Frame 728.
 4. County Business Patterns, 1951, p. 56.
 5. County Business Patterns, 1951, pp. 2, 56; Chinitz, Freight 
and the Metropolis, pp. 31, 96. Detail on plant locations in selected 
industries in the early part of the century is in Robert Murray Haig, 
Major Economic Factors in Metropolitan Growth and Arrangement 
(New York, 1927; reprint, New York, 1974), esp. pp. 64–65 and 
96–97. Haig’s maps make clear that other industries, notably ap-
parel, were not at all reliant on waterfront access.
 6. County Business Patterns, 1951. Brooklyn estimate from 
New York City marine and aviation commissioner Vincent A. G. 
O’Connor, Address to Brooklyn Rotary Club, October 17, 1956, 
Wagner Papers, Reel 40531, Frame 1585.
 7. PNYA, Outlook for Waterborne Commerce through the Port 
of New York, November 1948, Table VIII; Census Bureau, Historical 
Statistics, p. 761; Thomas Kessner, Fiorello H. LaGuardia and the 
Making of Modern New York (New York, 1989), p. 559.
 8. Chinitz, Freight and the Metropolis, pp. 77–78.
 9. Ibid., p. 202. For additional trucking charges, see PNYA, 
“Proposal for Development,” p. 65. Shippers filed eighty- nine “infor-
mal complaints” about bills for waiting time, wharf demurrage, and 
terminal charges during the year ending June 30, 1955, “the greater 
portion of which were against rates for truck loading and unloading 
waterborne freight in the Port of New York area.” U.S. Department 
of Commerce, Annual Report of the Federal Maritime Board and 
Maritime Administration, 1955, p. 33.
 10. Nelson, Divided We Stand, pp. 71–73; Vernon Jensen, Strife 
on the Waterfront (Ithaca, NY, 1974), pp. 105–110 and chap. 6; 
Philip Taft, “The Responses of the Bakers, Longshoremen and Team-
sters to Public Exposure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 74, no. 3 
(1960): 399. The executive director of the Waterfront Commission, 
Samuel M. Lane, charged in January 1955 that the New York Ship-
ping Association, the organization of port employers, was “hopeless” 
when it came to cleaning up waterfront corruption. See Waterfront 
Notes to Pages 110–111 • 413
Commission Press Release 1040, January 27, 1955, in Jensen Papers, 
Collection 4067, Box 16.
 11. The original proposals for the Waterfront Commission came 
from the Dewey- appointed New York State Crime Commission and 
from the Port Authority. See State of New York, Record of the Public 
Hearing Held by Governor Thomas E. Dewey on the Recommenda-
tions of the New York State Crime Commission for Remedying Con-
ditions on the Waterfront of the Port of New York, June 8–9, 1953, 
and PNYA, “Comparison of Plans for Improvement of Waterfront 
Labor Conditions in the Port of New York,” January 29, 1953; A. H. 
Raskin, “C- Men on the Waterfront,” NYT Magazine, October 9, 
1955, p. 15; letters from Lee K. Jaffe, director of public relations, 
PNYA, to Steve Allen, NBC Television, November 1, 1957, and from 
Daniel P. Noonan, director of Public Relations, Department of Ma-
rine and Aviation, to Steve Allen, October 31, 1957, Wagner Papers, 
Reel 40531, Frames 1920 and 1922. The film, a musical about a 
political campaign between rebels and old- line union leaders on the 
waterfront, was eventually shot on a privately owned pier.
 12. A pier inventory, compiled after some of the oldest had been 
demolished, can be found in New York City Planning Commission, 
The Waterfront (New York, 1971), p. 89; Cavanagh letter to Board 
of Inquiry; George Home, “City Action Seen on Port Program,” 
NYT, August 7, 1952; Austin J. Tobin, Transportation in the New 
York Metropolitan Region during the Next Twenty- five Years (New 
York, 1954), p. 7.
 13. A massive truck terminal in lower Manhattan, opened in 
1932, was the main exception. See Doig, Empire on the Hudson, pp. 
84–104 and 118–119.
 14. Wallace S. Sayre and Herbert Kaufman, Governing New York 
City: Politics in the Metropolis (New York, 1960), p. 341; cover letter 
in PNYA, Marine Terminal Survey of the New Jersey Waterfront 
(New York, 1949); Doig, Empire on the Hudson, pp. 259–260. A 
prominent article by Cullman published within nine months of the 
war’s end discussed the urgent need for improved port facilities and 
airports and noted the Port Authority’s success at carrying out large 
capital projects; the subheadline—written at a time when the agency 
had no responsibility whatsoever for ports or airports—was: “Now 
the Port Authority, with 25 years behind it, prepares for a new era of 
sea, land, and air traffic.” See “Our Port of Many Ports,” NYT Maga-
zine, May 5, 1946, p. 12.
414 • Notes to Pages 112–115
 15. John I. Griffin, The Port of New York (New York, 1959), p. 
91; PNYA, “Proposal for Development”; Austin J. Tobin, statement 
to New York City Board of Estimate, July 19, 1948, Doig Files; 
PNYA, Annual Report 1949, p. 7; PNYA, Marine Terminal Survey, 
5; Doig, Empire on the Hudson, pp. 353–354 and 538. As early as 
1946, the city’s commissioner of marine and aviation was rejecting 
suggestions that the Port Authority should organize a port improve-
ment campaign, commenting that “the Port Authority has nothing to 
do with the Port of New York, and has no authority in it.” See “Re-
juvenated Port to Rise in Future,” NYT, November 23, 1946. The 
ILA’s role in opposition is noted in Joshua Freeman, Working- Class 
New York (New York, 2000), p. 161.
 16. PNYA, Weekly Report to Commissioners, April 5, 1952; 
“Betterments Set for Port Newark,” NYT, April 9, 1952; Charles 
Zerner, “Big Port Terminal Near Completion,” NYT, January 31, 
1954; Edward P. Tastrom, “Newark Port to Start Operating New $6 
Million Terminal Soon,” JOC, March 9, 1954; “Awaits Bid for Piers,” 
Newark Evening News, December 8, 1952; “Modernizing the 
Docks,” New York World- Telegram, December 9, 1952; “City’s Port 
Costs Show Blunder in Rejecting Authority’s Aid,” Brooklyn Eagle, 
December 17, 1952.
 17. McLean’s plans developed quickly enough that they became 
public within two or three months; see Raskin, “Union Head Backs 
‘Sea- Land’ Trucks.” Tobin, “Transportation in the New York Metro-
politan Area during the Next Twenty- five Years,” pp. 10–12.
 18. PNYA, Minutes of Committee on Port Planning, September 2, 
1954, Meyner Papers, Box 43; PNYA, Minutes of the Commission-
ers, December 9, 1954, 232, Meyner Papers, Box 43; June 29, 1955, 
216; October 26, 1955, 316 and 322, all in Meyner Papers, Box 44; 
PNYA, Thirty- fifth Annual Report, 1956, pp. 1–4.
 19. Press release, Office of the Governor, December 2, 1955; 
PNYA, Minutes of Committee on Port Planning, January 5, 1956, 
Meyner Papers, Box 44. The Port Authority’s previous view of Eliza-
beth’s potential was expressed at Marine Terminal Survey, p. 26, 
which discussed the potential for port development in Newark, Jer -
sey City, Hoboken, Weehawken, and North Bergen, but emphasized 
with italic type that the Elizabeth waterfront was best suited for in-
dustrial use.
 20. Newark share derived from data in PNYA, Annual Report 
1955, p. 9, and PANYNJ, Foreign Trade 1976.
Notes to Pages 116–120 • 415
 21. Chris McNickle, To Be Mayor of New York: Ethnic Politics in 
the City (New York, 1993), pp. 97–107; proposed 1954 capital bud-
get, Wagner Papers, Reel 7709, Frame 1372; John J. Bennett, chair-
man, City Planning Commission, to Henry L. Epstein, deputy mayor, 
March 11, 1954, Wagner Papers, Reel 7709, Frame 1179; New York 
Department of Marine and Aviation, press release, August 24, 1955, 
Wagner Papers, Reel 40531, Frame 1220; Jensen, Strife on the Wa-
terfront, p. 147; Wagner letter to City Planning Commission in Wag-
ner Papers, Reel 40507, Frame 843.
 22. Cullman to Lukens, December 9, 1955; Lukens to file, De-
cember 12, 1955, in Doig Files.
 23. O’Connor address to New York Symposium on Increasing 
Port Efficiency, November 28, 1956, Wagner Papers, Reel 40531, 
Frame 1554; Department of Marine and Aviation, “Rebuilding New 
York City’s Water- front,” September 5, 1956, Wagner Papers, Reel 
40531, Frames 1603–1639.
 24. The New York Council on Port Promotion and Development, 
established by the city, estimated in 1963 that handling general cargo 
cost $10 per ton in New York versus $5 per ton in Baltimore. Wagner 
Papers, Reel 40532, Frame 866; “Statement of Vincent A. G. 
O’Connor, Commissioner of Marine & Aviation, regarding Opera-
tion of Grace Line Terminal at Marine & Aviation Piers 57 and 58, 
North River,” Wagner Papers, Reel 40531, Frame 1268; O’Connor 
address to convention of ILA, July 11, 1955, Wagner Papers, Reel 
40531, Frame 1314. Individual longshore gangs had established pri-
ority hiring rights on individual piers as “regular” and “regular 
extra” gangs, and the shift of a carrier from one pier to another could 
lead to violent disputes over priority status at the new location.
 25. Department of City Planning, Newsletter, November 1956, 
Wagner Papers, Reel 40507, Frame 1596; oral history interviews 
with Robert F. Wagner, May 21, 1988, Julius C. C. Edelstein, April 5, 
1991, and Thomas Russell Jones, June 10, 1993, in LaGuardia and 
Wagner Archive, LaGuardia Community College, Queens, NY; Mc-
Nickle, To Be Mayor of New York, p. 121; Downtown–Lower Man-
hattan Association, “Lower Manhattan” (1958), p. 6.
 26. Press release, September 4, 1957, Wagner Papers, Reel 40531, 
Frame 1945; press release, September 11, 1957, Wagner Papers, Reel 
40531, Frame 1957; O’Connor statement at Board of Estimate capi-
tal budget hearing, November 18, 1958, Wagner Papers, Reel 40532, 
Frame 1149; interview with Guy F. Tozzoli, New York, January 13, 
416 • Notes to Pages 121–122
2004; letter from Howard S. Cullman and Donald V. Lowe to Mayor 
Wagner and the Board of Estimate, September 18, 1957, Wagner Pa-
pers, Reel 40531, Frame 1448; “Statement by Vincent A. G. 
O’Connor, Commissioner of Marine and Aviation, regarding Port of 
New York Authority’s Attack on Lease with Holland- America Line 
for $18,723,000 Terminal, New Pier 40, to Be Built at the Foot of 
West Houston Street, Manhattan,” September 19, 1957, Wagner Pa-
pers, Reel 40531, Frame 1936.
 27. James Felt, chairman, City Planning Commission, to 
O’Connor, September 23, 1959, Wagner Papers, Reel 40508, Frame 
691; City of New York Department of City Planning, “Redevelop-
ment of Lower Manhattan East River Piers,” September 1959, Wag-
ner Papers, Reel 4058, Frame 693; Moses to Felt, September 29, 
1959, Wagner Papers, Reel 40508, Frame 688; O’Connor to Board 
of Estimate, November 25, 1959, Wagner Papers, Reel 40531, Frame 
2179. Moses, still a powerful figure in the city and the region during 
this period, appears to have had no interest in freight transportation. 
The port, maritime affairs, and freight transportation in general re-
ceive no mention in Robert A. Caro’s authoritative biography, The 
Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York (New York, 
1974), and Moses’s own memoir says nothing about shipping be-
yond the observation that, in the late 1940s, “our magnificent port 
was literally dying.” See Moses’s Public Works: A Dangerous Trade 
(New York, 1970), p. 894. According to Guy Tozzoli, who knew 
Moses for many years, Moses was very interested in autos and pas-
senger transportation, but had no interest in port- related matters or 
in the freight- handling problems of New York businesses. Author’s 
interview, New York, January 13, 2004.
 28. Condit, The Port of New York, 2:346.
 29. U.S. Department of Commerce, Annual Report of the Federal 
Maritime Board and Maritime Administration, 1957 (Washington, 
DC, 1957), p. 12; PNYA, Minutes of the Commissioners, February 
14, 1957, p. 98, Meyner Papers, Box 44; PNYA, Weekly Report to 
the Commissioners, November 15, 1965, Doig Files; “Full- Scale 
Container Ship Proves Itself,” 6; U.S. National Academy of Sciences, 
Roll- On, Roll- Off Sea Transportation (Washington, DC, 1957), p. 9; 
“Propeller Club Annual Convention,” Marine Engineering/Log (No-
vember 1958), pp. 64–65.
 30. PNYA, “Report on Port Authority Operation of Port Newark 
Notes to Pages 123–126 • 417
& Newark Airport, January 1, 1960–December 31, 1960”; Chinitz, 
Freight and the Metropolis, p. 156.
 31. Elizabeth officials protested that the Port Authority was vio-
lating a 1951 agreement that it would not condemn land in Elizabeth 
without the city’s consent. See PNYA, Weekly Report to the Commis-
sioners, March 31, 1956; letter, Austin J. Tobin to Elizabeth mayor 
Nicholas LaCorte, May 21, 1956; New Jersey governor Robert B. 
Meyner to Elizabeth city attorney Jacob Pfeferstein, June 4, 1956; 
Memo, Francis A. Mulhearn, PNYA legal department to Tobin, June 
29, 1956, all in Doig Files. On the differing reactions to the con-
tainer, see PNYA, Minutes of Committee on Construction, March 26, 
1958, Meyner Papers, Box 44; O’Connor address on Marine and 
Aviation Day, May 23, 1961, Wagner Papers, Reel 40532, Frame 
325; “Creation of a Container Port,” Via—Port of New York, Special 
Issue: Transatlantic Transport Preview (1965): 31; Anthony J. Tozzoli 
and John S. Wilson, “The Elizabeth, N.J. Port Authority Marine Ter-
minal,” Civil Engineering, January 1969, pp. 34–39.
 32. New York Department of Marine and Aviation, press release, 
January 23, 1961, Wagner Papers, Reel 40532, Frame 357; Remarks 
by Mayor Robert F. Wagner, August 30, 1962, Wagner Papers, Reel 
40532, Frame 457; Walter Hamshar, “Face- Lift for the Waterfront,” 
New York Herald Tribune, November 2, 1963; “NY Port Develop-
ment Scored,” JOC, December 23, 1963; New York City Planning 
Commission, “The Port of New York: Proposals for Development” 
(1964), pp. 8, 13, and Plate 2; Minutes of New York City Council on 
Port Development and Promotion, November 18, 1963, Wagner Pa-
pers, Reel 40532, Frame 728; “Report on Recommendations by the 
Steering Committee to the Committee for Alleviating Truck Conges-
tion and Delay at the Waterfront of the City of New York,” October 
7, 1965, Wagner Papers, Reel 40532, Frame 978.
 33. King to Tobin, November 8, 1965; PNYA, Minutes of the 
Commissioners, November 10, 1965; PNYA, press release, Novem-
ber 15, 1965; PNYA, Minutes of the Commissioners, September 8, 
1966; PNYA, transcript of “New Jersey Observations,” WNDT- TV, 
November 15, 1965, all in Doig files; “One Dispute at a Time,” NYT, 
July 12, 1966.
 34. PNYA, Annual Report, 1996, p. 14; First National City Bank, 
“The Port of New York: Challenge and Opportunity,” June 1967, pp. 
27, 30; Longshore News, October–November 1966, p. 4,
418 • Notes to Pages 127–130
 35. Edward C. Burks, “Jersey Facilities Set Port Agency Pace,” 
NYT, May 11, 1975; Edith Evans Asbury, “Port Agency Scored on 
Jersey Project,” NYT, July 17, 1966; PANYNJ, Foreign Trade 1976, 
p. 12.
 36. Brown to Lindsay, May 12, 1966, in Mayor John V. Lindsay 
Papers, NYMA, Reel 45087, Frame 1560; PNYA, “The 1970 Out-
look for Deep Sea Container Services (New York, 1967),” p. 2; 
PNYA, Container Shipping: Full Ahead (New York, 1967); “Con-
tainers Widen Their World,” Business Week, January 7, 1967; George 
Home, “Container Revolution, Hailed by Many, Feared,” NYT, Sep-
tember 22, 1968; memo, Halberg to Brown, May 11, 1966, Lindsay 
Papers, Reel 45087, Frame 1561.
 37. Halberg to Deputy Mayor Robert W. Sweet, September 29, 
1967, in Lindsay Papers, Department of Marine and Aviation, Reel 
45087, Frame 1653; Longshore News, April 1967, p. 4, November 
1967, p. 4, October 1968, p. 1, and October 1969, p. 1; Werner Bam-
berger, “A 90- Second Depot for Containerships Studied,” NYT, De-
cember 1, 1966; Paul F. Van Wicklen, “Elizabeth: The Port of New 
York’s Prototype for the Container Era” (manuscript prepared for 
Ports and Terminals, April 28, 1969); memo, Patrick F. Crossman, 
commissioner of economic development, to Lindsay, April 2, 1970, 
in Lindsay Papers, Confidential Subject Files, Reel 45208, Frame 
707; Lindsay to Tobin, June 29, 1970, in Lindsay Papers, Confiden-
tial Subject Files, Reel 45208, Frame 668. The proposed vertical ter-
minal for two thousand containers was developed by a New York 
company called Speed- Park Inc.; see R. D. Fielder, “Container Stor-
age and Handling,” Fairplay, January 5, 1967, p. 31.
 38. Joseph P. Goldberg, “U.S. Longshoremen and Port Develop-
ment,” in Port Planning and Development as Related to Problems of 
U.S. Ports and the U.S. Coastal Environment, ed. Eric Schenker and 
Harry C. Brockel (Cambridge, MD, 1974), pp. 76–78; Containerisa-
tion International Yearbook 1974 (London, 1974), p. 76; Waterfront 
Commission of New York Harbor, Annual Report, various years; 
County Business Patterns, 1964, 34–91, and County Business Pat-
terns, 1973, pp. 34–111.
 39. Condit, The Port of New York, 1:346; Bill D. Ross, “The New 
Port Newark Is Prospering,” NYT, December 12, 1973; Goldberg, 
“U.S. Longshoremen and Port Development,” p. 78; David F. White, 
“New York Harbor Tries a Comeback,” New York, October 16, 
1978, p. 75; Richard Phalon, “Port Jersey Development Could Cut 
Notes to Pages 131–134 • 419
Brooklyn Jobs,” NYT, January 14, 1972; New York City Planning 
Commission, The Waterfront, p. 35; William DiFazio, Longshore-
men: Community and Resistance on the Brooklyn Waterfront (South 
Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey, 1985), pp. 34–35.
 40. Bureau of the Census, U.S. Census of Population and Hous-
ing 1960 (Washington, DC, 1962), Report 104, Part I, and 1970 
Census of Population and Housing (Washington, DC, 1972), New 
York SMSA, Part I. Tract boundaries in 1970 were not identical to 
those in 1960, so definitive conclusions about economic change in 
small geographic areas are possible only in scattered instances. Hous-
ing data from New York City Planning Commission, “New Dwelling 
Units Completed in 1975,” Mayor Abraham Beame Papers, NYMA, 
Departmental Correspondence, City Planning Commission, Reel 
61002, Frame 167.
 41. County Business Patterns, 1964, 1967, and 1976, Part 34. For 
discussion of the economic impact of containerization on New York 
City’s economy, see Marc Levinson, “Container Shipping and the De-
cline of New York, 1955–1975,” Business History Review 80 (2006): 
49–80.
 42. By the late 1970s, according to one estimate, trucking a con-
tainer from the waterfront to the railroad yard cost $85 to $120 in 
Brooklyn, but only $21 in New Jersey; see White, “New York Har -
bor Tries a Comeback,” p. 78. After adjusting for differences in the 
industrial mix, Edgar M. Hoover and Raymond Vernon found that 
plants in the New York region built between 1945 and 1956 occu-
pied 4,550 square feet of land per worker, compared to 1,040 square 
feet in plants built prior to 1922; they also calculated that taxes on 
industries in big- city locations were much higher than in other parts 
of the New York region. See Anatomy of a Metropolis (Cambridge, 
MA, 1959), pp. 31, 57–58. Factory relocation data are taken from 
Marilyn Rubin, Ilene Wagner, and Pearl Kamer, “Industrial Migra-
tion: A Case Study of Destination by City- Suburban Origin within 
the New York Metropolitan Area,” Journal of the American Real 
Estate and Urban Economics Association 6 (1978): 417–437.
 43. Ellen M. Snyder- Grenier, Brooklyn! An Illustrated History 
(Philadelphia, 1996), pp. 152–163; “Red Hook,” in The Columbia 
Gazeteer of North America, 2000 on- line edition; Finlay, Work on 
the Waterfront, p. 61; Richard Harris, “The Geography of Employ-
ment and Residence in New York since 1950,” in Dual City: Restruc-
turing New York, ed. John Mollenkopf and Manual Castells (New 
420 • Notes to Pages 136–137
York, 1992), p. 133; New York State Department of Labor, Popula-
tion and Income Statistics; Brian J. Godfrey, “Restructuring and De-
centralization in a World City,” Geographical Review, Thematic 
Issue: American Urban Geography 85 (1995): 452.
Chapter 6 
Union Disunion
 1. New York Shipping Association, “Proposed Revision of Gen-
eral Cargo Agreement for the Period October 1, 1954 to September 
30, 1956,” October 20, 1954, and “Proposed Revision of the General 
Cargo Agreement for the Period October 1, 1954 to September 30, 
1956,” December 28, 1954, both in ILA files, Robert F. Wagner 
Labor Archive, New York University, Collection 55, Box 1.
 2. Information on the ILA’s relations with McLean comes from 
author’s interviews with Thomas W. Gleason, New York, September 
29, 1992, and with Guy F. Tozzoli, New York, January 14, 2004. For 
background on ILA concerns during this period, see Jensen, Strife on 
the Waterfront, pp. 173–183; Philip Ross, “Waterfront Labor Re-
sponse to Technological Change: A Tale of Two Unions,” Labor Law 
Journal 21, no. 7 (1970): 400; and “General Cargo Agreement Nego-
tiated by the New York Shipping Association Inc. with the Interna-
tional Longshoremen’s Association (IND) for the Port of Greater 
New York and Vicinity, October 1, 1956–September 30, 1959,” in 
Jensen Papers, Collection 4096, Box 5.
The Waterfront Commission was seeking to change hiring proce-
dures in the port to eliminate the corruption that came from shape-
 up. In general, employers hired twenty- one- man gangs rather than 
individual workers. Each pier (or each employer in Port Newark, 
where there were no traditional piers) had one or more “regular” 
gangs that had first call on work. If additional men were needed on a 
given day, the employer would call for “extra” gangs, with the rules 
for determining assignment of extra gangs varying greatly in different 
sections of the port. Pan- Atlantic, for example, had eight “regular” 
gangs, four Negro and four white. As there was not enough work 
for all regular gangs every day, a “regular” gang on one pier might 
also be a “regular extra” gang at another pier if work was available. 
Employers wanted the ability to choose among available “extra” 
gangs, but the ILA objected that employers would favor younger 
workers, leaving gangs with older longshoremen without work. The 
Note to Page 138 • 421
issue was an extremely difficult one for the union. Newark and parts 
of Brooklyn had arrangements to equalize earnings among gangs, 
and union leaders in those areas objected strongly to any attempts 
to standardize hiring throughout the port, as the Waterfront Com-
mission sought. Manhattan, Jersey City, and Hoboken locals appear 
to have been much more willing to reach agreement with the com-
mission. Despite the intensity of concern, the ILA does not appear 
to have had much success in equalizing earnings; of the six gangs 
that worked for Pan- Atlantic between October 1956 and September 
1957, one had average earnings of more than $6,000, two had aver-
age earnings of $4,500 to $4,999, and one had average earnings of 
less than $3,500. See transcript of Waterfront Commission of New 
York Harbor union- management conferences on seniority issues in 
ILA District 1 Papers, Kheel Center, Catherwood Library, Cornell 
University, Collection 5261, Box 1. Wage data are in New York Ship-
ping Association, “Port- Wide Survey of Gang Earnings,” September 
12, 1958, in Jensen Papers, Collection 4067, Box 13.
The ILA was not formally segregated in the Port of New York, 
but there were two identifiably “Negro” locals, Local 968 in Brook-
lyn and Local 1233 in Newark. The Brooklyn local never succeeded 
in controlling its own pier, and its leaders complained that employers 
discriminated against Negroes in hiring extra gangs; see the testi-
mony of Thomas Fauntleroy, business agent of Local 968, “In the 
Matter of the Arbitration between ILA- Independent, and Its Affili-
ated Locals, and New York Shipping Association,” September 29, 
1958, in Jensen Papers, Collection 4096, Box 5. In 1959, Local 968 
merged into the large Local 1814. The Newark local fared better, be-
cause, unlike the situation in New York City, Newark custom did not 
give priority to any local or gangs. Individual gangs were identified in 
Waterfront Commission records by codes such as “I” (Italian), “N” 
(Negro), and “S” (Spanish). See P. A. Miller Jr., “Current Hiring Cus-
toms and Practices in All Areas in the Port of New York,” Waterfront 
Commission, December 20, 1955, in Jensen Papers, Collection 4067, 
Box 14. On race relations on the New York docks, see Rubin, The 
Negro in the Longshore Industry, pp. 59–69, and Nelson, Divided 
We Stand, pp. 79–86.
 3. New York Shipping Association, “Proposals for Renewal of 
the General Cargo Agreement Submitted by the New York Shipping 
Association, Inc., to the I.L.A. (Ind.),” October 29, 1956; ILA Locals 
1418 and 1419 proposal, September 5, 1956; New Orleans Steam-
422 • Notes to Pages 138–143
ship Association counterproposal, October 1, 1956; Board of Inquiry 
Created by Executive Order No. 10689, “Report to the President on 
the Labor Dispute Involving Longshoremen and Associated Occupa-
tions in the Maritime Industry on the Atlantic and Gulf Coast,” No-
vember 24, 1956, all in ILA files, Collection 55, Box 1, Folder 
“Agreement, Negotiations, & Strikes, June–Dec. 1956, 1 of 2.”
 4. McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1958, p. 4; Pacific Mari-
time Association, Monthly Research Bulletin, January 1959; “Hopes 
Dim for Accord between Dock Union, New York Shippers, Pacts Ex-
pire Tonight,” Wall Street Journal, September 26, 1959. Field com-
ment in Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, p. 228.
 5. NYT, November 18, 1958; and November 27, 1958; Port of 
New York Labor Relations Committee press release, December 17, 
1958, in Jensen Papers, Collection 4067, Box 13.
 6. Jacques Nevard, “I.L.A. Demands Six- Hour Day and Curbs 
on Automation,” NYT, August 11, 1959; Ross, “Waterfront Labor 
Response,” p. 401.
 7. Jack Turcott, “Pier Strike Ties Up E. Coast, Spurs Revolt,” 
New York Daily News, October 2, 1959; Jensen, Strife on the Water-
front, pp. 235–247.
 8. Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, pp. 247–250; “Dock Union, 
Shippers Sign Agreement on Labor Contract,” Wall Street Journal, 
December 4, 1959. Barnett’s comment appears in New York Ship-
ping Association, “Progress Report 1959,” p. 5, and his views were 
echoed in Walter Hamshar, “I.L.A. Container Pact Gives N.Y. Cargo 
Lead,” Herald Tribune, January 3, 1960; Jacques Nevard, “Port 
Gains Noted in New Pier Pact,” NYT, January 3, 1960.
 9. Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, pp. 250–253. Industry con-
cern about the long- term cost is reflected in the statement by New 
York Shipping Association chairman Alexander Chopin in New York 
Shipping Association, “Progress Report 1959,” p. 8.
 10. For background on the ILWU, see Bruce Nelson, Workers on 
the Waterfront: Seamen, Longshoremen, and Unionism in the 1930s 
(Champaign, 1990); Selvin, A Terrible Anger; Larrowe, Harry 
Bridges; Howard Kimeldorf, Reds or Rackets? The Making of Radi-
cal and Conservative Unions on the Waterfront (Berkeley, 1988); 
Stephen Schwartz, Brotherhood of the Sea: A History of the Sailors’ 
Union of the Pacific, 1885–1985 (Piscataway NJ, 1986); Henry 
Schmidt, “Secondary Leadership in the ILWU, 1933–1966,” inter -
views by Miriam F. Stein and Estolv Ethan Ward (Berkeley, 1983); 
Notes to Pages 144–148 • 423
and ILWU, The ILWU Story: Two Decades of Militant Unionism 
(San Francisco, 1955). The number of stoppages is from Charles P. 
Larrowe, Shape Up and Hiring Hall (Berkeley, 1955), p. 126. An-
drew Herod, Labor Geographies: Workers and the Landscapes of 
Capitalism (New York, 2001), emphasizes the importance of spatial 
location in the maintenance of longshore unions’ power; although he 
specifically discusses the ILA, his discussion is equally applicable to 
the ILWU. A list of forty- eight “hip- pocket rules” in the Port of Los 
Angeles, presented by the Pacific Maritime Association, appears in 
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Merchant Marine and 
Fisheries, Study of Harbor Conditions in Los Angeles and Long 
Beach Harbor, July 16, 1956, p. 14. The special importance of work 
rules to unions in an industry that relies on casual labor is empha-
sized by Hartman, Collective Bargaining, p. 41. For examples of the 
many rules in West Coast ports, see Hartman, Collective Bargaining, 
pp. 46–72, and Lincoln Fairley, Facing Mechanization: The West 
Coast Longshore Plan (Los Angeles, 1979), pp. 16–17.
 11. “Working Class Leader in the ILWU, 1935–1977,” interview 
with Estolv Ethan Ward, 1978 (Berkeley, 1980), p. 803.
 12. J. Paul St. Sure, “Some Comments on Employer Organiza-
tions and Collective Bargaining in Northern California since 1934” 
(Berkeley, 1957), pp. 598–609.
 13. Louis Goldblatt, “Working Class Leader in the ILWU, 1935–
1977,” interviews by Estolv Ethan Ward (Berkeley, 1977), p. 784; 
Clark Kerr and Lloyd Fisher, “Conflict on the Waterfront,” Atlantic 
183, no. 3, (1949): 17.
 14. St. Sure, “Some Comments,” p. 643, claimed that Bridges 
carefully avoided calling a strike or letting the ILWU contract expire 
to avoid jurisdictional challenges. See also Larrowe, Harry Bridges, 
p. 352. Bridges’s testimony and much other information about the 
state of the Los Angeles port appears in the record of the Merchant 
Marine and Fisheries Committee hearings, Study of Harbor Condi-
tions in Los Angeles and Long Beach Harbor, October 19–21, 1955, 
and July 16, 1956.
 15. Larrowe, Harry Bridges, p. 352.
 16. The formal committee statement is in “Report of the Coast 
Labor Relations Committee to the Longshore, Ship Clerks and Walk-
ing Bosses Caucus,” March 13–15, 1956, in ILA District 1 Files, Col-
lection 5261, Box 1, Folder “Pacific Coast Experience.”
 17. Herb Mills, “The San Francisco Waterfront—Labor/Manage-
424 • Notes to Pages 149–152
ment Relations: On the Ships and Docks. Part One: ‘The Good Old 
Days’ ” (Berkeley, 1978), p. 21; Fairley, Facing Mechanization, p. 48; 
Hartman, Collective Bargaining, pp. 73–83.
 18. Jennifer Marie Winter, “Thirty Years of Collective Bargaining: 
Joseph Paul St. Sure, Management Labor Negotiator 1902–1966” 
(M.A. thesis, California State University at Sacramento, 1991), chap. 
4. In one well- known incident, the permanent labor arbitrator in the 
Port of San Francisco was called to a ship to deal with a safety griev-
ance and found only four workers on the job, sitting in the hold, 
drinking coffee. The rest of their gang, he was informed, had gone to 
a ball game and would come to work at midnight. See Larrowe, 
Harry Bridges, p. 352. Hartman, Collective Bargaining, pp. 84–88; 
ILWU, “Coast Labor Relations Committee Report,” October 15, 
1957.
 19. Hartman, Collective Bargaining, pp. 87–89; Sidney Roger, “A 
Liberal Journalist on the Air and on the Waterfront,” interview by 
Julie Shearer (Berkeley, 1998), p. 616.
 20. Fairley, Facing Mechanization, p. 64, discussed how the six- 
hour day was “perverted” by subsequent practices. For details on the 
vote, see Hartman, Collective Bargaining, p. 91. The leadership’s dif-
ficulty convincing members on this issue is evident from a cartoon 
appearing in the Dispatcher, the ILA newspaper, showing a tomb-
stone with the epitaph “Here Lies Young Mr. Overtimer—Survived 
by a Loving Family Who Wishes He Had Worked Less and Lived 
Longer.” See ILWU, “Report of the Officers to the Thirteenth Biennial 
Convention,” Part I, April 6, 1959, p. 11.
 21. Longshoreman comment from interview with Bill Ward, then 
a member of ILWU Local 13 in Wilmington, CA, in ILWU–University 
of California at Berkeley Oral History Project. Warning about auto-
mation appears in ILWU, “Report . . . to the Thirteenth Biennial 
Convention,” p. 10. Comment about Bridges is from Roger, “A Lib-
eral Journalist,” p. 187.
 22. For more on these talks, see Fairley, Facing Mechanization, 
pp. 103–104; Hartman, Collective Bargaining, pp. 90–94; Larrowe, 
Harry Bridges, pp. 352–353. The full text of the ILA proposal is re-
printed in Fairley, Facing Mechanization, p. 80.
 23. Fairley, Facing Mechanization, pp. 122–129; Hartman, Col-
lective Bargaining, pp. 96–97; Winter, “Thirty Years of Collective 
Bargaining,” chap. 5. Savings per hour calculated from data in Hart-
man, Collective Bargaining, p. 123.
Notes to Pages 153–159 • 425
 24. Fairley, Facing Mechanization, pp. 132–133, and Germain 
Bulcke, “Longshore Leader and ILWU–Pacific Maritime Association 
Arbitrator,” interview by Estolv Ethan Ward (Berkeley, 1984), p. 66.
 25. Pacific Maritime Association and ILWU, “Memorandum of 
Agreement on Mechanization and Modernization,” October 18, 
1960; Ross, “Waterfront Labor Response,” p. 413.
 26. The split among PMA members is detailed in Fairley, Facing 
Mechanization, p. 125, and Winter, “Thirty Years of Collective Bar-
gaining,” chap. 5. Hartman, Collective Bargaining, pp. 99–100, dis-
cusses opposition within the ILWU. Nearly one- third of San Fran-
cisco longshoremen were over age fifty- four, and only 11 percent 
were younger than thirty- five. See Robert W. Cherny, “Longshoremen 
of San Francisco Bay, 1849–1960,” in Davies et al., Dock Workers, 
1:137.
 27. Hartman, Collective Bargaining, pp. 164–166.
 28. Ibid., pp. 124–144 and 272–279; Finlay, Work on the Water -
front, p. 65.
 29. Hartman quotation, Collective Bargaining, p. 150; on 
“Bridges loads,” see Larrowe, Harry Bridges, p. 356.
 30. Bridges statement in ILWU/PMA joint meeting, August 7, 
1963, quoted in Hartman, Collective Bargaining, p. 147; arbitration 
award ibid., p. 148.
 31. Cost savings from ibid., p. 178; container statistics derived 
from ibid., pp. 160 and 270. Hartman estimates that the container 
accounted for about 4 percent of the total productivity increase be-
tween 1960 and 1963 and perhaps 7 or 8 percent by 1964 (p. 162).
 32. The Canadian version of the Mechanization and Moderniza-
tion Agreement was signed November 21, 1960, just a month after 
the U.S. pact, and can be found in Jensen Papers, Accession 4067, 
Box 15. Kempton column is cited in Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, 
p. 261.
 33. Goldberg, “U.S. Longshoremen and Port Development,” 68–
81; New York Shipping Association, “Progress Report 1959.” Glea-
son discusses his background in a July 31, 1981, interview with 
Debra Bernhardt, New Yorkers at Work Oral History Collection, 
Robert Wagner Labor Archive, New York University, Tape 44, al-
though much of the information provided in this interview is unreli-
able. Peter Bell, interview by Debra Bernhardt, August 29, 1981, 
New Yorkers at Work Oral History Collection, Robert Wagner Labor 
Archive, New York University, Tape 1OA, discusses dissidents.
426 • Notes to Pages 160–164
 34. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, Annual Report 
1961–62, p. 16.
 35. Werner Bamberger, “Container Users Study Royalties,” NYT, 
November 24, 1960; “Container Board Set Up,” NYT, April 11, 
1961; Panitz, “NY Dockers.” Longshore work hours were compiled 
by the New York Shipping Association, and a partial set can be found 
in the Vernon Jensen files; unfortunately, missing records make it 
impossible to reconstruct the full series of hours.
 36. Field comment appears in an undated memo to all ILA mem-
bers in the Port of New York in ILA Files, Collection 55, Box 1, while 
demand for portwide seniority is in “Local No. 856, ILA, Proposals 
to 1962 Atlantic Coast District Wage Scale Committee and New 
York District Council,” n.d., Collection 55, Box 1.
 37. ILA, “Changes to Be Made in General Cargo Master Agree-
ment,” June 13, 1962; New York Shipping Association, “Monetary 
Offer to International Longshoremen’s Association,” August 1, 1962; 
Memo from Walter L. Eisenberg, Ph.D., Economic Consultant, to 
Thomas W. Gleason, Chairman, ILA Negotiating Committee, Re Em-
ployer Proposals of August 1, 1962, n.d.; all in ILA Files, Collection 
55, Box 1, Folder “Agreements, Negotiations, & Strikes 1961–63”; 
John P. Callahan, “Anastasia Balks at I.L.A. Demands,” NYT, July 
17, 1962. Gleason speech to World Trade Club, September 10, 1962, 
quoted in Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, p. 269.
 38. Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, pp. 271–279.
 39. “Statement by the Mediators,” “Mediators’ Proposal,” and 
“Memorandum of Settlement,” mimeographed, January 20, 1963; 
Congressional Record, January 22, 1963, p. 700; Herald Tribune, 
September 12, 1963, p. 27.
 40. New York Department of Marine and Aviation, press release, 
January 23, 1961, Wagner Papers, Reel 40532, Frame 357; Remarks 
by Mayor Robert F. Wagner, August 30 1962, Wagner Papers, Reel 
40532, Frame 457; Walter Hamshar, “Face- Lift for the Waterfront,” 
Herald Tribune, November 2, 1963; Minutes of New York City 
Council on Port Development and Promotion, November 18, 1963, 
Wagner Papers, Reel 40532, Frame 728; John P. Callahan, “Automa-
tion Fear Haunts Dockers,” NYT, June 9, 1964. Gleason comment in 
Jensen, Strife on the Waterfront, p. 301. The comments of Philip Ross 
also are relevant; by 1964, he argues, ILA leaders believed that the 
government would not tolerate further strikes, especially where 
Notes to Pages 165–166 • 427
featherbedding was involved. See Ross, “Waterfront Labor Re-
sponse,” p. 404.
 41. James J. Reynolds, chairman, Theodore W. Kheel, and James 
J. Healy, “Recommendation on Manpower Utilization, Job Security 
and Other Disputed Issues for the Port of New York,” September 25, 
1964. The ILA’s reaction appeared in the Brooklyn Longshoreman, 
September 1964. Jensen argues, probably correctly, that Gleason 
wanted to avoid a strike in his first negotiation as union president, 
but that he lacked the power to deliver; see Strife on the Waterfront, 
p. 307.
 42. On the Johnson administration’s concerns about labor settle-
ments increasing inflation, see Edwin L. Dale Jr., “Johnson Voices 
Inflation Fear,” NYT, May 10, 1964. Quotation is from ILA Local 
1814, “Shop Stewards Information Bulletin,” December 17, 1964, 
ILA Files, Collection 55, Box 1.
 43. George Panitz, “New York Pier Talks Hit Surprising Snag,” 
JOC, January 5, 1965; Gleason interview by Debra Bernhardt. The 
local- by- local tally on the vote was published in the Congressional 
Record, January 12, 1965, p. 582. The settlement in the South Atlan-
tic and Gulf ports reduced minimum gang sizes there to eighteen; see 
George Home, “2 Southern Lines in Dockers’ Pact,” NYT, February 
17, 1965. Despite the ILA agreement, local disputes over manning in 
Boston led Sea- Land to cancel plans to open service there; see Alan F. 
Schoedel, “Boston Talks in Deadlock,” JOC, June 29, 1966, “Boston 
Containership Handling Dispute Ends,” JOC, August 4, 1966, and 
“No Progress Reported in Boston Port Dispute,” JOC, November 
22, 1966.
 44. The U.S. Department of Labor’s broad concerns are laid out 
in Norman G. Pauling, “Some Neglected Areas of Research on the 
Effects of Automation and Technological Change on Workers,” Jour-
nal of Business 37, no. 3 (1964): 261–273. Following an interna-
tional conference in London in December 1962, the American Foun-
dation on Automation and Employment published “A Report to the 
President of the United States,” April 30, 1963. The labor move-
ment’s official view is in Arnold Beichman, “Facing Up to Automa-
tion’s Problems,” AFL- CIO Free Trade Union News 18, no. 2 (1963). 
On the UAW, see Reuben E. Slesinger, “The Pace of Automation: An 
American View,” Journal of Industrial Economics 6, no. 3 (1958): 
254, esp. Kennedy’s comments were made at a press conference on 
428 • Notes to Pages 167–169
February 14, 1962. For an interesting discussion of automation is-
sues in the context of the printing industry, which presents many 
similar issues, see Michael Wallace and Arne L. Kalleberg, “Industrial 
Transformation and the Decline of Craft: The Decomposition of Skill 
in the Printing Industry, 1931–1978,” American Sociological Review 
47, no. 3 (1982): 307–324.
 45. Ben B. Seligman, Most Notorious Victory: Man in an Age of 
Automation (New York, 1966), pp. 227 and 231; Juanita M. Kreps, 
Automation and Employment (New York, 1964), p. 20.
 46. Seligman, Most Notorious Victory, pp. 238–241; Benjamin S. 
Kirsh, Automation and Collective Bargaining (New York, 1964), pp. 
175–176.
 47. Goldblatt, “Working Class Leader,” p. 860. Herod, Labor Ge -
ographies, offers a sophisticated discussion of these disputes revolv-
ing around the nature and location of longshore work. Concern 
about jobs lost to barge carriers, known as LASH (lighter aboard 
ship) vessels, appears in Longshore News, December 1969, p. 3. Crit-
ics of the ILWU and ILA agreements have made much of the routini-
zation and “de- skilling” of longshore work due to containerization. 
See, for example, Herb Mills, “The Men along the Shore,” California 
Living, September 1980. Containerization undoubtedly eliminated 
the need for some skills but greatly increased the need for others. 
Sea- Land, as one example, employed almost twice as many mechan-
ics at Port Elizabeth in 1980 as were employed in the entire Port of 
New York two decades earlier. David J. Tolan, interview by Debra 
Bernhardt, August 1, 1980, New Yorkers at Work Oral History Col-
lection, Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives, New York University, Tape 
123. See also Finlay, Work on the Waterfront, pp. 20, 121.
 48. Bell interview; Finlay, Work on the Waterfront, pp. 174–176; 
Roger, “A Liberal Journalist,” p. 569. Stanley Aronowitz, From the 
Ashes of the Old: American Labor and America’s Future (Boston, 
1998), p. 31, blames the ILWU and the ILA for creating a situation 
in which longshoremen’s sons “are obliged to seek work in low- 
wage, nonunion retail and service jobs which typically pay half of 
what factory and transportation jobs pay,” under the rather romantic 
assumption that greater union resistance would have kept the docks 
as they were.
 49. The guaranteed annual income turned out to be a longer- term 
benefit than anyone at the time imagined. ILA members at the Port 
of New York claiming to have been displaced by containerization 
Notes to Pages 170–175 • 429
continued to receive payment in lieu of wages as late as 2006, 41 
years after the guarantee was instituted.
Chapter 7 
Setting the Standard
Many of the source materials for chapter 7 were obtained from 
private sources and may not be available in public archives.
 1. European container census of 1955 reported in Containers 7, 
no. 13 (1955): 9; “Grace Initiates Seatainer Service,” Marine Engi-
neering/Log (February 1960), p. 56. Marine Steel advertisement is in 
International Cargo Handling Coordination Association, “Contain-
erization Symposium Proceedings, New York City June 15, 1955,” p. 
3. Figures on the U.S. container fleet are from a Reynolds Metals Co. 
study cited in John G. Shott, Progress in Piggyback and Container -
ization (Washington, DC, 1961), p. 11.
 2. Douglas J. Puffert, “The Standardization of Track Gauge on 
North American Railways, 1830–1890,” Journal of Economic His-
tory 60, no. 4 (2000): 933–960, and “Path Dependence in Spatial 
Networks: The Standardization of Railway Track Gauge,” Explora-
tions in Economic History 39 (2002): 282–314.
 3. Puffert, “Path Dependence,” p. 286; A. T. Kearney & Co., “An 
Evaluation of the 35’ Container Size as a Major Factor in Sea- Land’s 
Growth,” typescript, 1967; Weldon, “Cargo Containerization”; 
“Grace Initiates Seatainer Service,” Marine Engineering/Log (Febru-
ary 1960), p. 56.
 4. On “lock- in,” see W. Brian Arthur, Increasing Returns and 
Path Dependence in the Economy (Ann Arbor, 1994), chap. 2. There 
is an extensive literature exploring the economic costs of technologi-
cal incompatibilities; see especially Joseph Farrell and Garth Saloner, 
“Installed Base and Compatibility: Innovation, Product Prean-
nouncements, and Predation,” American Economic Review 76, no. 5 
(1986): 940–955; Michael L. Katz and Carl Shapiro, “Systems Com-
petition and Network Effects,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 
no. 2 (1994): 93–115; and S. J. Liebowitz and Stephen E. Margolis, 
“Network Externality: An Uncommon Tragedy,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 8, no. 2 (1994): 133–150.
 5. Minutes of November 18, 1958, meeting of Committee on 
430 • Notes to Pages 176–182
Standardization of Van Container Dimensions (hereafter Marad Di-
mensions Committee).
 6. Minutes of November 19, 1958, meeting of Committee on 
Construction and Fittings (hereafter Marad Construction Commit-
tee); author’s telephone interview with Vincent Grey, May 1, 2005.
 7. Minutes of MH- 5 Van Container Subcommittee, February 
25, 1959.
 8. Marad Dimensions Committee, December 9, 1958; Minutes 
of MH- 5 Van Container Subcommittee, February 25, 1959.
 9. On railroads’ capacities, see Tippetts- Abbett- McCarthy- 
Stratton, Shoreside Facilities, p. 8, while railroad standardization is 
treated in John G. Shott, Piggyback and the Future of Freight Trans-
portation (Washington, DC, 1960), p. 33, and Progress in Piggyback, 
p. 19. Concerning Bull Line, see F. M. McCarthy, “Aspects on Con-
tainers,” presented to Marad Construction Committee, December 
10, 1958. Bull Line’s choice of sizes is justified in International Cargo 
Handling Coordination Association, “Containerization Symposium 
Proceedings,” p. 19.
 10. Minutes of Marad Dimensions Committee, April 16, 1959; 
letter, Ralph B. Dewey, Pacific American Steamship Association, to 
L. C. Hoffman, Marad, May 25, 1959; memorandum to various 
steamship company officials from George Wauchope, Committee of 
American Steamship Lines, June 16, 1959; minutes of Marad Dimen-
sions Committee, June 24, 1959. Matson’s position on height is laid 
out in a “Report on why the standard container height and regional 
supplementary standard van container lengths, as proposed by the 
ASA Sectional Committee MH5, should not be approved,” submitted 
to Pacific American Steamship Association, February 15, 1960; Ed-
ward A. Morrow, “Line Chides I.C.C. on Rate Policies,” NYT, April 
17, 1960.
 11. Letter, W. H. Reich, chairman, Marad/Industry Container 
Standardization Committee on Construction and Fittings, to L. C. 
Hoffman, Marad, June, 25, 1959.
 12. Morris Forgash, “Transport Revolution at the Last Frontier—
The Thought Barrier,” in Revolution in Transportation, ed. Karl M. 
Ruppenthal (Stanford, 1960), p. 59; “Uniformity Urged in Big Con-
tainers,” NYT, September 12, 1959.
 13. Minutes of MH- 5 Size Task Force, September 16, 1959. See 
testimony of Les Harlander to the House Merchant Marine and Fish-
eries Committee, November, 1967. For comments on Hall, see Vince 
Notes to Pages 182–185 • 431
Grey, “Setting Standards: A Phenomenal Success Story,” in Jack Lat-
imer, Friendship among Equals (Geneva, 1997), p. 40. Pan- Atlantic 
had not been a participant in the standardization process until that 
point; Matson had been, but was not notified of the September 16 
meeting until the previous day and did not attend; letter of Robert 
Tate, Matson, to J. M. Gilbreth, Van Container Subcommittee, Sep-
tember 15, 1959. On Hall’s interest in preferred numbers, see MH- 5 
Executive Committee, minutes, May 4, 1961.
 14. Ralph B. Dewey, Pacific American Steamship Association, to 
Herbert H. Hall, November 12, 1959; Dewey to L. C. Hoffman, 
Marad, November 12, 1959; Hoffman to Dewey, n.d.; Marad Di-
mensions Committee, January 14, 1960; Pacific American Steamship 
Association, minutes of special containerization committee, February 
8, 1960; Dewey letter and statement to MH- 5 committee, February 
25, 1960. The vote is given in a letter from Hall to Dewey, June 20, 
1961. Grace Line and American President Lines were so concerned 
by the government’s threat not to fund nonstandard containerships 
that they amended pending application for construction subsidies so 
that their proposed ships would handle 20- foot containers rather 
than 17- footers, which Grace was already using.
 15. Letter from George C. Finster, standards manager, American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, to members of MH- 5 committee, 
June 29, 1960; letter, George Wauchope to Committee of American 
Steamship Lines members, July 26, 1960; Pacific American Steam-
ship Association, minutes of containerization committee, August 4, 
1960; “U.S. Body Enters Container Field,” NYT, April 28, 1961. For 
Hall’s view on “modular” sizes, see MH- 5 committee minutes, June 
6, 1961. On the procedures by which the standards were deemed to 
have been approved, see the testimony of Fred Muller Jr., U.S. House 
of Representatives, Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, 
Cargo Container Dimensions, November 16, 1967. The standards 
were codified as ASA MH5.1- 1961. Federal Maritime Board and 
Maritime Administration press release NR 61- 35, April 28, 1961.
 16. MH- 5 minutes, June 6, 1961.
 17. Tineke M. Egyedi, “The Standardized Container: Gateway 
Technologies in Cargo Transportation,” Working Paper, Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, 2000.
 18. Containers, no. 30 (December 1963): 26; Egyedi, “The Stan-
dardized Container”; “Is Container Standardization Here?” Via—
432 • Notes to Pages 185–194
Port of New York, Special Issue: Transatlantic Transport Preview 
(1965): 28.
 19. Cost estimate appears in “Memorandum of Comment” by 
John J. Clutz, Association of American Railroads, to MH- 5 Van Con-
tainer Subcommittee #3, December 13, 1961.
 20. Minutes, MH- 5 Van Container Subcommittee #3, December 
14, 1961; Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization.”
 21. Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization”; letter, M. R. McEvoy, 
president, Sea- Land Service, to Vincent G. Grey, American Standards 
Association, January 29, 1963.
 22. Letter, James T. Enzensperger, Pacific American Steamship As-
sociation, to Eugene Spector, American Merchant Marine Institute, 
November 5, 1964; Tantlinger, “U.S. Containerization.”
 23. American Merchant Marine Institute, “Van Containers in 
Service,” n.d. [circulated January 1965]; Pacific American Steamship 
Association, minutes of containerization committee, January 21, 
1965; telegram, K. L. Selby, president, National Castings Co., to 
R. K. James, executive director, Committee of American Steamship 
Lines, January 7, 1965.
 24. Pacific American Steamship Association, “SAAM Proposed 
Cargo Container Standards,” January 20, 1965; Herbert H. Hall, 
“Facts Concerning the ASA- MH5 Sectional Committee Proposed 
Van Container Corner Fitting,” June 14, 1965; Memorandum, Tant-
linger to W. E. Grace, Fruehauf Corporation, August 12, 1965.
 25. Murray Harding, “Final World Standards Set for Van Freight 
Containers,” JOC, October 5, 1965; Harlander interview, COHP.
 26. “Is Container Standardization Here?” p. 30.
 27. Various countries’ findings are detailed in letter, Harlander to 
Martin Rowbotham, chairman, second ad hoc panel on corner fit-
tings, January 13, 1967, and letter, Robotham to panel members, 
February 1, 1967. Other sources include Grey, “Setting Standards,” 
p. 41; ISO, “Report of Ad Hoc Panel Convened at London Meeting,” 
January 1967; and author’s telephone interview with Les Harlander, 
November 2, 2004. Ship lines’ opposition is reported in the minutes 
of a meeting of “some members” of the MH- 5 Securing and Han-
dling Subcommittee, February 16, 1967. The ISO container and fit-
ting specifications are in Jane’s Freight Containers, 1st ed. (New York 
1968), pp. 4–11.
 28. Minutes of MH- 5 Demountable Container Subcommittee, 
Notes to Pages 195–201 • 433
July 20, 1967; Edward A. Morrow, “Rail Aide Scores Sea Contain-
ers,” NYT, September 17, 1967.
 29. ASA- MH- 5 committee, cited in L. A. Harlander, “Container 
System Design Developments over Two Decades,” Marine Technol-
ogy 19 (1982): 366; Meyers, “The Maritime Industry’s Expensive 
New Box.”
 30. The possibility of such additional restrictions on nonstandard 
operators was much discussed at the 1967 hearings of the U.S. House 
of Representatives Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, 
reprinted in Cargo Container Dimensions (Washington, DC, 1968).
 31. Minutes of MH- 5 Demountable Container Subcommittee, 
November 9, 1965; memo, L. A. Harlander to S. Powell and others, 
Matson Navigation Company, November 12, 1965.
 32. Minutes of ASA Group 1 Demountable Container Subcom-
mittee, February 2, 1966; minutes of MH- 5 Sectional Committee, 
June 23, 1966; letter, Hall to Tantlinger, November 1, 1966; Har -
lander interview, COHP; L. A. Harlander, “The Role of the 24- Foot 
Container in Intermodal Transportation,” submitted to ASA MH- 5 
committee, June 1966; Statement of Michael R. McEvoy, president, 
Sea- Land Service, in House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Commit-
tee, Cargo Container Dimensions, p. 130; MH- 5 Executive Commit-
tee, minutes, June 1, 1967.
 33. Congressional Record, November 6, 1967, pp. 31144–31151; 
House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee, Cargo Container 
Dimensions, Gulick testimony, October 31, 1967, p. 28; Ralph B. 
Dewey testimony, November 16, 1967, pp. 162–169.
 34. House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee, Cargo 
Container Dimensions, Powell testimony November 1, 1967, p. 50, 
and McLean comment November 16, 1967, p. 121.
 35. Ibid., Powell testimony November 1, 1967, pp. 70–71; Har -
lander interview, COHP.
 36. Minutes, combined meeting of MH- 5 Load and Testing and 
Handling and Securing Subcommittees, November 30, 1966; Leslie 
A. Harlander, “Intermodal Compatibility Requires Flexibility of 
Standards,” Container News, January 1970, p. 20; Minutes of MH- 5 
committee, January 29 and May 20–21, 1970; L. A. Harlander, 
“Container System Design Developments,” p. 368.
 37. Marad, “Intermodal Container Services Offered by U.S. Flag 
Operators,” January 1973 (unpaginated).
434 • Notes to Pages 202–208
Chapter 8 
Takeoff
 1. New York figure estimated from PNYA data; West Coast fig-
ure taken from Hartman, Collective Bargaining, p. 160.
 2. Ernest W. Williams Jr., The Regulation of Rail- Motor Rate 
Competition (New York, 1958), p. 208; Werner Bamberger, “Con-
tainers Cited as Shipping ‘Must,’ ” NYT, January 21, 1959, and “In-
dustry Is Exhibiting Caution on Containerization of Fleet,” NYT, 
December 4, 1960. Military freight accounted for one- fifth of the 
revenues of U.S.- flag international ship lines in 1964; see Werner 
Bamberger, “Lines Ask Rule on Cargo Bidding,” NYT, July 14, 1966.
 3. McLean Industries, Annual Reports, 1957–60; Werner Bam-
berger, “Lukenbach Buys 3 of 5 Vessels Needed for Containership 
Fleet,” NYT, November 26, 1960; George Horne, “Luckenbach Ends 
Domestic Service,” NYT, February 21, 1961; “Ship Line Drops Flor-
ida Service,” NYT, March 2, 1961; “Grace Initiates Seatainer Ser -
vice,” Marine Engineering/Log (1960), p. 55; Niven, American Pres-
ident Lines, p. 211.
 4. “Coast Carriers Win Rate Ruling,” NYT, January 5, 1961.
 5. United Cargo Corporation, a freight forwarder, offered con-
tainer service from the United States to Europe as early as 1959, but 
the service involved boxes only 10½ feet long, which were carried in 
ships’ holds along with other freight. Jacques Nevard, “Container 
Line Plans Extension,” NYT, June 6, 1959.
 6. Census Bureau, Historical Statistics, pp. 711 and 732; Beverly 
Duncan and Stanley Lieberson, Metropolis and Region in Transition 
(Beverly Hills, 1970), pp. 229–245.
 7. Census Bureau, Historical Statistics, pp. 732–733; ICC, 
Transport Economics, July 1956, p. 10.
 8. For information on piggyback operations prior to 1950, see 
Kenneth Johnson Holcomb, “History, Description and Economic 
Analysis of Trailer- on- Flatcar (Piggyback) Transportation” (Ph.D. 
diss., University of Arkansas, 1962), pp. 9–13.
 9. Movement of Highway Trailers by Rail, 293 ICC 93 (1954).
 10. U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract 1957, Table 705, p. 
564; Wallin, “The Development, Economics, and Impact,” p. 220; 
ICC Bureau of Economics, “Piggyback Traffic Characteristics,” De-
cember 1966, p. 6. On Teamster opposition, see Irving Kovarsky, 
Notes to Pages 209–213 • 435
“State Piggyback Statutes and Federalism,” Industrial and Labor Re-
lations Review 18, no. 1 (1964): 45.
 11. Curtis D. Buford, Trailer Train Company: A Unique Force in 
the Railroad Industry (New York, 1982); Comments of Roy L. 
Hayes, “Panel Presentations: Railroad Commercial Panel,” Transpor-
tation Law Journal 28, no. 2 (2001): 516; Walter W. Patchell, “Re-
search and Development,” in Management for Tomorrow, ed. Nicho-
las A. Glaskowsky Jr. (Stanford, 1958), pp. 31–34; Shott, Piggyback 
and the Future of Freight Transportation, p. 7.
 12. Comments of Richard Steiner, “Panel Presentations: Railroad 
Commercial Panel”; Holcomb, “History, Description and Economic 
Analysis,” pp. 43–44; Eric Rath, Container Systems (New York, 
1973), p. 33.
 13. Holcomb, “History, Description and Economic Analysis,” pp. 
54–67; Rath, Container Systems, p. 33.
 14. Details here are taken from the ensuing U.S. District Court 
decision, New York, New Haven & Harford v. ICC, 199 F. Supp 635.
 15. The relevant sentence in the Transportation Act of 1958 
reads, “Rates of a carrier shall not be held up to a particular level to 
protect the traffic of any other mode of transportation, giving due 
consideration to the objectives of the national transportation policy 
declared in this Act.” “Coast Carriers Win Rate Ruling,” NYT, Janu-
ary 5, 1961; Robert W. Harbeson, “Recent Trends in the Regulation 
of Intermodal Rate Competition in Transportation,” Land Econom-
ics 42, no. 3 (1966). The case was finally decided in the railroads’ 
favor by a unanimous Supreme Court, ICC v. New York, New Haven 
& Hartford, 372 U.S. 744, April 22, 1963. The dubious economics 
of determining a railroad’s “fully- distributed cost” of carrying a par-
ticular load are, fortunately, beyond the scope of this book.
 16. Holcomb, “History, Description and Economic Analysis,” p. 
220; Bernard J. McCarney, “Oligopoly Theory and Intermodal 
Transport Price Competition: Some Empirical Findings,” Land Eco-
nomics 46, no. 4 (1970): 476.
 17. Five of the ten leading users of the New York Central’s Flexi- 
Van service were freight forwarders, but four leading manufacturers 
and the Montgomery Ward department- store chain also were on the 
list; see memo, R. L. Milbourne, New York Central, to managers, 
July 10, 1964, in Penn Central Archives, Hagley Museum and Li-
brary, Wilmington, DE, Accession 1810/Box B- 1872/Folder 15. Alex-
436 • Notes to Pages 214–222
ander Lyall Morton, “Intermodal Competition for the Intercity 
Transport of Manufactures,” Land Economics 48, no. 4 (1972): 360.
 18. ICC, “Piggyback Traffic Characteristics,” pp. 6 and 58–60; 
Forgash, “Transport Revolution at the Last Frontier,” p. 63; Robert 
E. Bedingfield, “Personality: Champion of the Iron Horse,” NYT, 
February 22, 1959; “Trains and Trucks Take to the Ocean,” Via—
Port of New York, Special Issue: Transatlantic Transport Preview 
(1965), p. 26; ICC, Transport Statistics in the United States, Part 9: 
Private Car Lines, Table 5, various years.
 19. ICC, “Piggyback Traffic Characteristics,” p. 28. Canada’s pig-
gyback carloadings from 1959 through 1961 were about one- third 
those of the United States, despite a much smaller economy. Contain-
ers, no. 35 (June 1966): 33.
 20. Edward A. Morrow, “3- Way Piggyback Introduced Here,” 
NYT, August 10, 1960; Robert E. Bedingfield, “PiggyBack Vans Span 
Ocean Now,” NYT, March 12, 1961; Containers, no. 31 (June 1964): 
25.
 21. Author’s interview with Bernard Czachowski, New York, 
January 24, 1992.
 22. PNYA, Annual Reports, various years; Hartman, Collective 
Bargaining, p. 270; McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1965.
 23. U.S. Department of Commerce, Marad, “United States Flag 
Containerships,” April 25, 1969.
 24. “Operators Uneasy on New Ships; Fear of Rapid Obsoles-
cence Cited,” NYT, May 24, 1959. On 1964 discussions about enter-
ing the transatlantic trade, see Scott Morrison interview, COHP.
 25. Hall interview; George Home, “Intercoastal Trade,” NYT, 
January 29, 1961, “Line Will Renew U.S. Coastal Run,” NYT, Febru-
ary 23, 1961, and “U.S. Aid Is Denied for Coastal Runs,” NYT, May 
13, 1961. Some of the details here are from Jerry Shields, The Invis-
ible Billionaire: Daniel Ludwig (Boston, 1986), p. 224.
 26. Earl Hall interview, October 2, 1992; Sea- Land, Annual Re-
port, 1965.
 27. Morrison interview, COHP.
 28. Ibid.; Werner Bamberger, “Rules on Cargo Boxes Revised to 
Spur Use and Ease Shipping,” NYT, March 17, 1966; Edward Cowan, 
“Container Service on Atlantic Begins,” NYT, April 24, 1966.
 29. Cowan, “Container Service”; Edward A. Morrow, “New 
Stage Nears in Container Race,” NYT, March 28, 1966; A. D. Little, 
Containerisation on the North Atlantic (London, 1967), p. 14.
Notes to Pages 223–227 • 437
 30. On whiskey, see Morrison interview, COHP. The estimate of 
Sea- Land’s military cargo comes from memorandum, B. P. O’Connor, 
director of international freight sales, to J. R. Sullivan, Weehawken 
division superintendent, New York Central Railroad, April 27, 1966, 
in Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/8. On competitive bidding, 
see OAB/NHC, Post 1946 Command Files, MSTS, Box 889, Folder 
1/1966; U.S. Department of Defense, news release No. 750- 66, Au-
gust 31, 1966; “US Is Firm on Its Plan for Bidding,” JOC, June 29, 
1966.
 31. PNYA, Annual Reports; “The 1970 Outlook for Deep Sea 
Container Services,” p. 2; Edward Cowan, “Container Service on At-
lantic Begins,” NYT, April 24, 1966.
 32. Wallin, “The Development, Economics, and Impact,” p. 16; 
PNYA, Container Shipping: Full Ahead; “Countdown on for Con-
tainer Ships,” Via—Port of New York, Special Issue: Transatlantic 
Transport Preview (1965): 8; Werner Bamberger, “A Danger Is Seen 
in Container Rise,” NYT, September 9, 1967; “Containerization 
Comes of Age,” Distribution Manager, October 1968.
 33. “Containers Widen Their World,” Business Week, January 7, 
1967; Frank Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans: Containerisa-
tion from the 1950s to the Present (St. Johns, NF, 2002), p. 41.
 34. Statement of Lester K. Kloss, A. T. Kearney & Co., in U.S. 
House of Representatives, Merchant Marine and Fisheries Commit-
tee, Container Cargo Dimensions, November 16, 1967, p. 183; 
“Containerization Comes of Age”; comment by U.S. Navy Capt. 
D. G. Bryce, “MSTS Area Commanders’ Conference,” March 4–7, 
1969, OAB/NHC, Command Histories, Box 193, Folder 2/1989, p. 
137.
 35. Press release, German Federal Railroad, July 26, 1967, in 
Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/6. The famed Beeching Report, 
best known for recommending the closure of hundreds of passenger 
stations and dozens of services across Great Britain, also urged estab-
lishment of a network of “liner trains” hauling 20- foot and 27- foot 
containers to recapture shipments of manufactured goods that had 
shifted to road. The report said that with anticipated growth in over-
seas shipments in containers, “Liner Train services for ports should 
be particularly attractive.” See British Railways Board, The Reshap-
ing of British Railways, Part 1 (London, 1963), pp. 141–148.
 36. Letter, J. R. Sullivan, New York Central, to H. W. Large, Vice 
438 • Notes to Pages 227–233
President–Traffic, Pennsylvania Railroad, April 11, 1966, in Penn 
Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/8.
 37. Aaron Cohen, “Report on Containerization in Export- Import 
Trade,” Traffic Executive Association–Eastern Railroads, April 20, 
1966, in Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/9. Charges for empty 
containers are discussed in statement of James A. Hoyt, Grace Line, 
to Traffic Executive Association Eastern Railroads, January 30, 1967, 
in Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/10. On the Whirlpool pro-
posal, see letter, Harold E. Bentsen, manager, international distribu-
tion, Whirlpool Corp., to B. P. O’Connor, director, international 
freight sales, New York Central Railroad, June 28, 1967 and letter, 
O’Connor to Bentsen, July 6, 1967, Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 
1675/8; on Matson, see memo, D. L. Werby to W. R. Brooks, New 
York Central, July 20, 1967, Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/10.
 38. Letter, John A. Daily to J. R. Sullivan, New York Central, Feb -
ruary 6, 1967, in Penn Central Archives, 1810/B- 1675/10.
 39. Kenneth Younger interview, December 16, 1991.
 40. “A Railroader on Containerization,” Distribution Manager, 
October 1968; ICC, Transport Statistics.
Chapter 9 
Vietnam
 1. The formal decision to expand the war was communicated in 
National Security Action Memorandum No. 328, April 6, 1965.
 2. Command History 1964, Military Assistance Command Viet -
nam (MACV), Record Group (RG) 472, NACP; Edward J. Marolda 
and Oscar P. Fitzgerald, The United States Navy and the Vietnam 
Conflict, vol. 2, From Military Assistance to Combat, 1959–1965 
(Washington, DC, 1986), pp. 357–358; Sealift 15, no. 6 (1965): 5.
 3. Memorandum for the Commander in Chief, Pacific. Terms of 
reference for Honolulu conference, April 8, 1965, Historians Back-
ground Material Files, 1965, MACV, RG 472, NACP. Information on 
backups is in MACV Fact Sheet, June 19, 1965, Mission Council 
Action Memorandums, Historians Background Material Files 1965, 
MACV, RG 472, NACP.
 4. Command History 1966, MACV, pp. 709–715, RG 472, 
NACP; “No Congestion at Saigon Port,” Vietnam Feature Service, 
Record 154933, VVA, Texas Tech University; Memorandum from 
W. S. Post Jr., Acting Commander, MSTS, to Secretary of Navy, 
Notes to Pages 233–235 • 439
Monthly Background Reports 1964–65, MSTS Command File, Box 
895, OAB/NHC, Washington, DC; William D. Irvin, “Reminiscences 
of Rear Admiral William D. Irvin” (Annapolis, 1980), p. 634.
 5. On the push system, see interview with Lt. Col. Dolan, trans-
portation officer, 1st Logistics Command, by Maj. John F. Hummer, 
March 30, 1966, in Classified Organizational History Files, 1966, 1st 
Logistics Command, U.S. Army Pacific, RG 550, NACP. Quotation is 
from Joseph M. Heiser Jr., A Soldier Supporting Soldiers (Washing-
ton, DC, 1991), p. 104.
 6. Edwin B. Hooper, Mobility Support Endurance: A Story of 
Naval Operational Logistics in the Vietnam War, 1965–1968 (Wash-
ington, DC, 1972), p. 62; General Frank S. Besson Jr., speech to 
Council on World Affairs, Dallas, TX, May 7, 1968, in Oral History 
Program Former Commanders—Frank S. Besson, Jr., Historical Of-
fice, Headquarters, U.S. Army Materiel Command, 1986. James F. 
Warnock Jr., “Recorded Recollections of Lt. Col. James F. Warnock 
Jr., Executive Officer, 29th Quartermaster Group, 1st Logistics Com-
mand, 9 April 1966,” Port Study, April 29, 1966, Classified Organi-
zational History Files, 1st Logistics Command, Records of US Army 
Pacific, RG 550, NACP; Logistics Summary for the week ending July 
30, 1965, General Records, Assistant Chief of Staff for Logistics, 
MACV, RG 472, NACP.
 7. Westmoreland and Killen memorandum to the ambassador, 
March 12, 1965, Historians Background Material Files, MACV, RG 
472, NACP; Joint Chiefs of Staff, Historical Division, The Joint 
Chiefs of Staff and the War in Vietnam, 1960–1968, Part II, pp. 21- 
23 and 21- 28, Historical Division, Joint Secretariat, Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, Record 33179, VVA; Command History 1965, MACV, pp. 
107–108 and 409.
 8. Quarterly Command Report, Second Quarter, FY 1966, Clas -
sified Organizational History Files, 1st Logistical Command, Re-
cords of U.S. Army Pacific, RG 550, NACP; “MACV Fact Sheet,” 
June 19, 1965; MACV, Historians Background Material Files, Min-
utes of Mission Council Meetings of June 28, 1965, July 6, 1965, and 
July 13, 1965, NACP 472/270/75/33/03, Box 20; The Joint Chiefs of 
Staff and the War in Vietnam, 1960–1968, Part II, p. 21- 25; telegram, 
Secretary of State Dean Rusk to Vietnam Coordinating Committee, 
August 8, 1965, in Mission Council Action Memorandums, 1965, 
Historians Background Material Files, MACV, RG 472, NACP; Talk-
ing Paper—End of Year Press Conference—Engineer Effort in Viet-
440 • Notes to Pages 236–240
nam, December 21, 1965; Miscellaneous Memoranda, Historians 
Background Material Files 1965, MACV, RG 472, NACP.
 9. Briefing for Secretary McNamara, Ambassador Lodge, Gen-
eral Wheeler, November 28, 1965, Historians Background Material 
Files, MACV, RG 472, NACP. The Military Sea Transportation Ser-
vice had declared Vietnam to be a “danger area” on May 11, which 
entitled seamen to double pay for each day there plus additional 
bonuses if their ship was attacked or if a harbor was attacked while 
their ship was in port; see memorandum, Glynn Donaho, Com-
mander, MSTS, to Secretary of Navy, May 11, 1965, in Monthly 
Reports, MSTS Command File, 1964–65, OAB/NHC. Ship diver -
sions to Philippines from author’s telephone interview with Milton 
Stickles, June 1, 2004. Quotation about second- class ports from 
MACV Command History 1965, p. 118; congressional visit in MACV, 
Historians Background Material Files, 1965, NACP 472/270/75/33/1- 
2, Box 8.
 10. Sealift, March 1966, p. 14; Command History 1965, p. 121, 
MACV, RG 472, NACP; “AB&T Employees Perform Critical Tasks 
in Vietnam,” Sealift, August–September 1969, p. 6; Lawson P. Ram-
age, “Reminiscences of Vice Admiral Lawson P. Ramage” (Annapolis, 
1970), p. 535.
 11. Command History 1965, p. 119, MACV, RG 472, NACP; 
Testimony of General Frank S. Besson Jr. to U.S. House of Represen-
tatives, Committee on Government Operations, Military Operations 
Subcommittee, August 4, 1970, p. 53.
 12. On palletization and other changes, see Highlights, U.S. 
Naval Operations Vietnam, January 1966, OAB/NHC. Quotation is 
from author’s interview with Robert N. Campbell, June 25, 1993.
 13. Author’s interview with William Hubbard, August 10, 1993; 
and Ron Katims interview, COHP; Baltimore Sun, January 22, 1966.
 14. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the War in Vietnam, 1960–1968, 
Part II, pp. 37- 6 to 37- 8; VVA, Record 33179; HQ MACV, Com-
mand History 1965, NARA 472/270/75/32/6- 7, Box 1, pp. 231–232. 
Sea- Land had not been involved in the last major MSTS exercise 
before the Vietnam buildup, which was conducted entirely with 
breakbulk vessels; see Sealift, December 1964, p. 4, January 1965, p. 
5, and March 1965, p. 13. A plan for containerships to carry Conex 
containers is discussed in Alan F. Schoedel, “Viet Containership Plan 
Eyed,” JOC, January 26, 1966. The Okinawa contact is reported in 
Notes to Pages 241–244 • 441
Werner Bamberger, “Container Ships Sought for War,” NYT, May 
26, 1966.
 15. On Equipment Rental Inc., see Katims interview, COHP, and 
Operational Report—Lessons Learned for quarter ended July 31, 
1966, Command Histories, 1st Logistics Command, USARV, RG 
472, NACP. On Okinawa and Vietnam contracts, see Besson speech 
to National Defense Transportation Association Annual Transporta-
tion and Logistics Forum, Washington, DC, October 14, 1968, His-
torical Office, Headquarters, U.S. Army Materiel Command; author’s 
telephone interview with Frank Hayden, former deputy head of con-
tracts, MSTS, June 29, 2004; Department of Defense news release 
458- 66, May 25, 1966, Military Sea Transportation Service, Com-
mand History 1966, OAB/NHC, Washington, DC. “Ship Run Bid 
Refused,” Baltimore Sun, June 24, 1966.
 16. Operational Report—Lessons Learned for quarter ended July 
31, 1966, 1st Logistical Command, p. 16. Port delays are reported in 
Briefing Data Prepared in Conjunction with Secretary of Defense 
McNamara’s Visit to RVN, October 1966, General Records, Assis-
tant Chief of Staff for Logistics, MACV, RG 472, NACP. Data on 
man- hour requirements are from Besson presentation to Association 
of the United States Army, October 10, 1966, Historical Office, 
Headquarters, U.S. Army Materiel Command.
 17. Memorandum from Donaho on inspection trip to Asia, Au-
gust 2–20, 1966, in Command Files, MSTS, OAB/NHC; Financial 
and Statistical Report, MSTS, various issues, OAB/NHC; Logistics 
Summary for 5–20 August, 1966, General Records, Assistant Chief 
of Staff for Logistics, MACV, RG 472, NACP; Operational Report—
Lessons Learned for period ending January 31, 1967, 1st Logistics 
Command, RG 472, NACP Logistics Summary, 15 December 1966, 
1st Logistical Command, RG 472, NACP; Pacific Stars & Stripes, 
October 14, 1966.
 18. Ramage, “Reminiscences,” p. 532; Werner Bamberger, “Navy 
Augments Shipping for War,” NYT, March 30, 1967; Sealift, May 
1967, pp. 9–10.
 19. Katims interview, COHP; Campbell interview; Logistical 
Summaries, June and September 1967, USRVN, RG 472, NACP; 
Sealift, October 1967, p. 20; “New Supply Concept Comes to Viet-
nam,” 1st Logistical Command Vietnam Review 1, no. 1 (1967).
 20. Command History 1967, p. 772, MACV, RG 472, NACP; 
Vice Admiral Lawson P. Ramage, Remarks to Propeller Club of the 
442 • Notes to Pages 245–247
United States, St. Louis, October 11, 1968, Command History, 
MSTS, OAB/NHC. On the feeder ships, see John Boylston, interview 
with Arthur Donovan and Andrew Gibson, December 7, 1998, 
COHP, Box 639.
 21. U.S. Army Materiel Command, “Sharpe Army Depot,” No-
vember 1966; MSTS Area Commanders’ Conference, March 5–8, 
1968, p. 92, Command Histories, MSTS, AOB/NHC; MSTS Area 
Commanders’ Conference, March 5–8, 1968, p. 102.
 22. MSTS Area Commanders’ Conference, March 5–8, 1968, p. 
47; Logistical Summaries, 1968, USRVN, RG 472, NACP; Opera-
tional Report—Lessons Learned, October 31, 1968, Classified Orga-
nizational History Files, 1st Logistical Command, U.S. Army Pacific, 
RG 550, NACP; Memorandum from COMSERVPAC to COMNAV-
SUPSTSCOMME, June 30, 1968, Classified Organizational History 
Files, Assistant Chief of Staff for Logistics, RG 472, NACP; Memo-
randum from Commander, MSTS, September 26, 1968, Organiza-
tional History Files, Assistant Chief of Staff for Logistics, RG 472, 
NACP; Memorandum for Record, Expanded Containership Service 
to RVN, December 31, 1968, Classified Organizational History Files, 
Assistant Chief of Staff for Logistics, RG 472, NACP; Joseph M. 
Heiser Jr., Vietnam Studies: Logistic Support (Washington, DC, 
1974), p. 199.
 23. “Remarks of Malcom P. McLean” in MSTS, “MSTS/Industry 
Conference on Military Sealift, 12–23 December 1967,” Command 
History, MSTS, OAB/NHC; Classified Organizational History Files 
for the Quarter Ending 30 April 1968, 1st Logistical Command, RG 
472, NACP; Besson testimony, August 4, 1970, p. 46.
 24. Vice Admiral Lawson P. Ramage, Speech to National Defense 
Transportation Agency 22nd National Transportation and Logistics 
Forum, October 6, 1967, Command History, MSTS, OAB/NHC; 
“New Supply Concept Comes to Vietnam”; Besson remarks to Na-
tional Defense Transportation Association, October 14, 1968, p. 13, 
and congressional testimony, August 4, 1970, pp. 73–75. The Joint 
Logistics Review Board’s recommendations were controversial and 
were carried out only in part; see, for example, the objections to 
merging the MSTS with the army’s port and trucking operations, in 
Edwin B. Hooper, “The Reminiscences of Vice Admiral Edwin B. 
Hooper” (Annapolis, 1978), pp. 472–474.
 25. Frank B. Case, “Contingencies, Container Ships, and Lighter -
Notes to Pages 248–254 • 443
age,” Army Logistician 2, no. 2 (1970): 16–22. On containerization 
of ammunition, see “Operation TOCSA: A Containerization First!” 
Army Logistician 2, no. 5 (1970): 14, and Sealift, April 1970, pp. 
14–16; Besson testimony, August 4, 1970, p. 47.
 26. Military Prime Contract Files, July 1, 1965–June 30, 1973, 
Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, RG 330, NACP. 
On competitive bidding, see Ramage, “Reminiscences,” pp. 540–542. 
Sea- Land’s revenues are reported in ICC, Transport Statistics, Part 5: 
Carriers by Water, Table 4.
 27. Katims interview, COHP; author’s interview with William P. 
Hubbard, July 1, 1993.
 28. MSTS Area Commanders Conference, March 1968, pp. 63, 
92, 96; Review and Analysis, March 1968, Command History, 1st 
Logistical Command, RG 472, NACP.
 29. Memorandum from C. F. Pfeifer, Inspector General, on Asia 
trip October 8–18, 1967, Command Histories, MSTS, OAB/NHC; 
Classified Organizational History Files for the Quarter Ending April 
30, 1968, 1st Logistical Command, Records of U.S. Army Pacific, RG 
550, NACP.
 30. Jane’s Freight Containers, p. 309.
 31. Jane’s Freight Containers, 1969–70 (New York, 1969), pp. 
179–180; Mark Rosenstein, “The Rise of Maritime Containerization 
in the Port of Oakland, 1950 to 1970” (M.A. thesis, New York Uni-
versity, 2000), p. 95; memo, H. E. Anderson, Traffic Manager, Pacific 
Command, October 30, 1968, General Records, Assistant Chief of 
Staff for Logistics, MACV, RG 472, NACP.
 32. Worden, Cargoes, pp. 150–153; Harlander interview, COHP.
 33. Scott Morrison interview, COHP; “Sea- Land Keeps Port 
Schedule,” Baltimore Sun, March 18, 1968; Boylston interview, 
COHP; Rosenstein, “The Rise of Maritime Containerization,” p. 96.
 34. Marad, Office of Maritime Promotion, “Cargo Data,” March 
11, 1969.
Chapter 10 
Ports in a Storm
 1. Thomas B. Crowley, “Crowley Maritime Corporation: San 
Francisco Bay Tugboats to International Transportation Fleet,” inter-
view by Miriam Feingold Stein (Berkeley, 1983), p. 33.
444 • Notes to Pages 255–264
 2. Census Bureau, Historical Statistics, Q495–496, p. 757; 
Roger H. Gilman, “The Port, a Focal Point,” Transactions of the 
American Society of Civil Engineers, 1958, p. 365.
 3. Gilman, “The Port, a Focal Point” originally presented in 
1956, should be seen as a call for just such involvement by govern-
ment agencies; Gilman was director of port planning for PNYA.
 4. U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract 1951, pp. 590–591.
 5. Seattle Port Commission, Shipping Statistics Handbook 
(1963); Erie, Globalizing L.A., p. 80.
 6. Fitzgerald, “A History of Containerization,” pp. 48, 91–93.
 7. Booz- Allen & Hamilton, “General Administrative Survey, 
Port of Seattle,” January 20, 1958, pp. VI- 1–VI- 12; Seattle Port Com-
mission, “Report of the Marine Terminal Task Force to the Citizens’ 
Port Commission,” October 1, 1959, pp. 7, 12, 34; Burke, A History 
of the Port of Seattle, pp. 114–117; Foster and Marshall Inc., “Port 
of Seattle, Washington, $7,500,000 General Obligation Bonds,” May 
4, 1961.
 8. Erie, Globalizing L.A., pp. 80–88.
 9. Woodruff Minor, Pacific Gateway: An Illustrated History of 
the Port of Oakland (Oakland, 2000), p. 45; Port of Oakland, “Port 
of Oakland,” 1957; Ben E. Nutter, “The Port of Oakland: Modern-
ization and Expansion of Shipping, Airport, and Real Estate Opera-
tions, 1957–1977,” interview by Ann Lage, 1991 (Berkeley, 1994), 
pp. 51, 84, 139; Rosenstein, “The Rise of Maritime Containeriza-
tion,” p. 45.
 10. George Home, “Intercoastal Trade,” NYT, January 29, 1961; 
Nutter, “The Port of Oakland,” pp. 78–79. American- Hawaiian 
never received the government subsidies it sought to finance its ships.
 11. Rosenstein, “The Rise of Maritime Containerization,” pp. 47, 
69; Nutter, “The Port of Oakland,” pp. 79–80; Port of Oakland, “60 
Years: A Chronicle of Progress,” 1987, pp. 17–18.
 12. Erie, Globalizing L.A., p. 89; Walter Hamshar, “Must U.S. 
Approve All Pier Leases,” Herald Tribune, April 5, 1964.
 13. Nutter, “The Port of Oakland,” p. 82; Rosenstein, “The Rise 
of Maritime Containerization,” pp. 98–104.
 14. Ting- Li Cho, “A Conceptual Framework for the Physical De-
velopment of the Port of Seattle,” Port of Seattle Planning and Re-
search Department, April 1966, p. 15; Arthur D. Little, Inc., Com-
munity Renewal Programming: A San Francisco Case Study (New 
York, 1966), p. 34.
Notes to Pages 264–270 • 445
 15. Rosenstein, “The Rise of Maritime Containerization,” pp. 65 
and 85–86; Worden, Cargoes, 148; Nutter, “The Port of Oakland,” 
pp. 112, 120; Port of Oakland, “1957 Revenue Bonds, Series P, 
$20,000,000,” October 17, 1978, p. 15; Erie, Globalizing L.A., p. 
90; Seattle Port Commission, “Container Terminals 1970–1975: A 
Development Strategy,” November 1969, pp. 1, 10.
 16. Burke, A History of the Port of Seattle, pp. 116, 122; Erie, 
Globalizing L.A., pp. 85–89; Minor, Pacific Gateway, p. 53; Fitz-
gerald, “A History of Containerization,” pp. 91–93; Niven, Ameri-
can President Lines, pp. 250–251; Nutter, “The Port of Oakland,”  
p. 84.
 17. U.S. Department of Commerce, Marad, “Review of United 
States Oceanborne Trade 1966” (Washington, DC, 1967), p. 11.
 18. Executive Office of the President, Economic Stabilization Pro -
gram, Pay Board, “East and Gulf Coast Longshore Contract,” May 
2, 1972.
 19. Alan F. Schoedel, “Boston Talks in Deadlock,” JOC, June 29, 
1966, and “No Progress Reported in Boston Port Dispute,” JOC, 
November 22, 1966.
 20. John R. Immer, Container Services of the Atlantic, 2nd ed. 
(Washington, DC, 1970), chaps. 14 and 15; Philadelphia Maritime 
Museum, “Delaware Riever Longshoremen Oral History Project: 
Background Paper,” Vertical File, ILA Local 1291, Tamiment Labor 
Archive, New York University; Longshore News, December 1969; 
Charles F. Davis, “Ports of Philadelphia Posts Impressive Record,” 
JOC, February 5, 1970; Bremer Ausschuß für Wirtschaftsforschung, 
Container Facilities and Traffic in 71 Ports of the World Midyear 
1910 (Bremen, 1971).
 21. Matson Research Corporation, The Impact of Containeriza-
tion on the U.S. Economy (Washington, DC, 1970), 1:88–98.
 22. Robert J. McCalla, “From ‘Anyport’ to ‘Superterminal,’ ” in 
Shipping and Ports in the Twenty- first Century, ed. David Pinder and 
Brian Slack (London, 2004), pp. 130–134; U.S. Department of Com-
merce, Marad, “Containerized Cargo Statistics Calendar Year 1974” 
(Washington, DC, 1974), p. 7; Austin J. Tobin, “Political and Eco-
nomic Implications of Changing Port Concepts,” in Schenker and 
Brockel, Port Planning and Development, p. 269. On Richmond’s 
brief experience as a containerport, see John Parr Cox, “Parr Termi-
nal: Fifty Years of Industry on the Richmond Waterfront,” interview 
by Judith K. Dunning (Berkeley, 1992), pp. 181–183.
446 • Notes to Pages 270–278
 23. PNYA, Via—Port of New York, Special Issue: Transatlantic 
Transport Preview (1965): 12–16.
 24. Anthony G. Hoare, “British Ports and Their Export Hinter -
lands: A Rapidly Changing Geography,” Geografiska Annaler, Series 
B. Human Geography 68, no. 1 (1986): 30–32; Fairplay, September 
14, 1967, p. 5.
 25. Wilson, Dockers, pp. 137, 309.
 26. Ibid., pp. 181–191; Anthony J. Tozzoli, “Containerization 
and Its Impact on Port Development,” Journal of the Waterways, 
Harbors and Coastal Engineering Division, Proceedings of the 
American Society of Civil Engineers 98, no. WW3 (1972): 335; Fair-
play, May 16, 1968, p. 51.
 27. McKinsey & Company, “Containerization: The Key to Low- 
Cost Transport,” June 1967; A. D. Little, Containerisation on the 
North Atlantic, p. 61; Turnbull, “Contesting Globalization,” pp. 
367–391.
 28. “Developments in London,” Fairplay, November 17, 1966, p. 
29.
 29. Wilson, Dockers, p. 239; J. R. Whittaker, Containerization 
(Washington, DC, 1975), pp. 35–42.
 30. Wilson, Dockers, p. 152; Fairplay, July 18, 1968, p. 9.
 31. Morrison interview, COHP; “UK Dockers Accept Pay Offer,” 
JOC, March 23, 1970; Edward A. Morrow, “ ‘Intermodal’ Fee Stirs a 
Dispute,” NYT, April 8, 1968; “Shipping Events: Inquiry Barred,” 
NYT, July 26, 1968.
 32. Hoare, “British Ports,” pp. 35–39; D. J. Connolly, “Social Re-
percussions of New Cargo Handling Methods in the Port of Lon-
don,” International Labour History 105 (1972): 555. Connolly 
charges “the application of cargo handling technology” with “the 
decline of the traditional dockland communities, and consequently, 
the debasement of social life among the dockworkers concerned,” p. 
566.
 33. Turnbull, “Contesting Globalization,” pp. 387–388; Wilson, 
Dockers, pp. 243–244; Fortune, November 1967, p. 152.
 34. Bremer Ausschuß für Wirtschaftsforschung, Container Facili-
ties, pp. 48–51.
 35. National Ports Council, Container and Roll- On Port Statis-
tics, Great Britain, 1911: Part 1 (London, 1971), p. 31; National 
Ports Council, Annual Digest of Port Statistics 1974, Vol. 1 (London, 
1975), Table 41; Henry G. Overman and L. Alan Winters, “The Ge-
Notes to Pages 279–284 • 447
ography of UK International Trade,” Working Paper CEPDP0606, 
Centre for Economic Performance, London, January 2004. Overman 
and Winters’s figures have been recalculated to exclude airborne 
trade.
 36. Fairplay, April 3, 1975, p. 15, and April 17, 1975, p. 56; 
National Ports Council, Annual Digest. Overman and Winters at-
tribute the shift in port performance to the changed pattern of Brit-
ish trade after 1973, and neglect the impact of containerization on 
the growth or decline of individual ports. See also Whittaker, Con-
tainerization, p. 33, and UK Department for Transport, “Recent De-
velopments and Prospects at UK Container Ports” (London, 2000), 
Table 4. Department for Transport, Transport Statistics Report: 
Maritime Statistics 2002 (London, 2003), Table 4.3, provides 1965 
tonnage figures for sixty- eight British ports, but data for Felixstowe 
are not available.
 37. Katims interview, COHP.
 38. Jane’s Freight Containers, p. 324; A. G. Hopper, P. H. Judd, 
and G. Williams, “Cargo Handling and Its Effect on Dry Cargo Ship 
Design,” Quarterly Transactions of the Royal Institution of Naval 
Architects 106, no. 2 (1964).
 39. Bremer Ausschuß für Wirtschaftsforschung, Container Facili-
ties; Fairplay, October 5, 1967.
 40. Jane’s Freight Containers, pp. 303–309; Jane’s Freight Con-
tainers 1969–70, pp. 175–194; Daniel Todd, “The Interplay of Trade, 
Regional and Technical Factors in the Evolution of a Port System: 
The Case of Taiwan,” Geografiska Annaler, Series B. Human Geog-
raphy 75, no. 1 (1993): 3–18.
 41. Port of Singapore Authority, Reports and Accounts, 1964 and 
1966.
 42. Port of Singapore Authority, A Review of the Past and a Look 
into the Future (Singapore, 1971), p. 8.
 43. Port of Singapore Authority, Reports and Accounts, 1968, p. 
22.
 44. Fairplay, November 7, 1974, p. 15; Containerisation Interna-
tional Yearbook; Gerald H. Krausse, “The Urban Coast in Singapore: 
Uses and Management,” Asian Journal of Public Administration 5, 
no. 1 (1983): 44–46.
 45. Containerisation International Yearbook; Krausse, “The 
Urban Coast in Singapore,” pp. 44–46; Port of Singapore Authority 
A Review, p. 19; United Nations Economic and Social Commission 
448 • Notes to Pages 285–290
for Asia and the Pacific, Commercial Development of Regional Ports 
as Logistics Centres (New York, 2002), p. 45.
Chapter 11 
Boom and Bust
 1. Comment by James A. Farrell Jr., chairman of Farrell Lines, to 
New York World Trade Club, NYT, June 7, 1966.
 2. Matson Research Corp., The Impact of Containerization, 
1:151; McLean Industries, Annual Report, 1968.
 3. Tozzoli, “Containerization and Its Impact on Port Develop-
ment,” pp. 336–337; Marad, “United States Flag Containerships,” 
April 25, 1969. Grace Line’s four biggest container- carrying ships, 
built in 1963–64, had room for 117 first- class passengers; see Jane’s 
Freight Containers 1969–70, p. 389. On the complexities of moving 
containers on breakbulk ships, see Broeze, The Globalisation of the 
Oceans, pp. 29 and 41.
 4. The first newly built vessel designed solely to carry containers 
in cells was the Kooringa, constructed in Australia in 1964 for As-
sociated Steamships. Kooringa carried containers of 14.5 tons or 
less—smaller than standard 20- foot containers—on a domestic route 
between specially built terminals in Melbourne and Fremantle. The 
ship had two gantry cranes for loading and unloading. Kooringa 
proved to be a dead end in the development of containerization, and 
lost any competitive advantage after the arrival of standard- size con-
tainers. The service was discontinued in 1975 after heavy losses. See 
Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, p. 34, and The Australian 
Naval Architect 2, no. 3 (1998): 6. Roy Pearson and John Fossey, 
World Deep- Sea Container Shipping (Liverpool, 1983), pp. 247–253.
 5. McKinsey & Co., “Containerization: A 5- Year Balance Sheet” 
(1972), p. 1- 1. McKinsey’s estimate of the outlays was £4 billion, 
which was $9.6 billion at the 1970 exchange rate; I have inflated this 
to current value using the U.S. producer price index for capital equip-
ment. For British carriers’ earnings, see Fairplay, January 12, 1967, 
p. 92, and January 11, 1968, p. 92A.
 6. ICC, Transport Statistics, 1965–67; John J. Abele, “Smooth 
Sailing or Rough Seas?” NYT, January 19, 1969; John J. Abele, “In-
vestors in Conglomerates Are Seeing the Other Side of the Coin,” 
NYT, April 13, 1969.
 7. Toomey interview; John Boylston interview, COHP; Frank V. 
Notes to Pages 291–299 • 449
Tursi, Susan E. White, and Steve McQuilkin, Lost Empire: The Fall 
of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (Winston- Salem, 2000), p. 174; 
John J. Abele, “Stock Exchange Ends Day Mixed,” NYT, January 4, 
1969.
 8. Immer, Container Services of the Atlantic, pp. 194 and 198–
200; Peter Stanford, “The SL- 7: Sea- Land’s Clipper Ship,” Sea His-
tory, Fall 1978; Sea- Land advertisement, “SL- 7,” n.d.
 9. Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, August 1982, p. 36; “Sea- Land 
Line Orders 5 New Containerships,” NYT, August 14, 1969; Tursi, 
White, and McQuilkin, Lost Empire, p. 176.
 10. United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia 
and the Pacific, Statistical Yearbook 1975 (Bangkok, 1977), pp. 205–
208; Marad, Foreign Oceanborne Trade of the United States, 1970.
 11. Fairplay, June 15, 1972.
 12. United Nations, Statistical Yearbook 1975, p. 208.
 13. Reuters, August 9, 1969; Marad, “Maritime Subsidies” 
(Washington, DC, 1971), p. 85.
 14. Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, p. 50; Fairplay, Oc-
tober 7, 1971, p. 41.
 15. United Nations, Statistical Yearbook 1975, pp. 41–43, 127–
129, 230–232, and 390; International Monetary Fund, Direction of 
Trade Annual 1969–75 (Washington, DC, 1977), pp. 2–3; Matson 
Research Corp., The Impact of Containerization, 1:114–122; “Mat-
son, Sea- Land to Expand Containership Services,” JOC, March 18, 
1970; Fairplay, February 16, 1967 and July 15, 1971, p. 11; OECD, 
OECD Economic Surveys: Australia, esp. 1979.
 16. McKinsey & Co., “Containerization: A 5- Year Balance 
Sheet,” p. 1- 4.
 17. Marad, “United States Flag Containerships,” April 25, 1969; 
Pearson and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 220.
 18. Marad, “A Statistical Analysis of the World’s Merchant Fleet,” 
1968 and 1974.
 19. Pearson and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 
30; Fairplay, February 10, 1972, p. 40.
 20. Matson Research Corp., The Impact of Containerization, 
1:24.
 21. P. Backx and C. Earle, “Handling Problems Reviewed,” Fair-
play, February 9, 1967, p. 36; McKinsey & Co., “Containerization: 
The Key to Low- Cost Transport,” p. 57; Fairplay, November 24, 
1966; Matson Research Corp., The Impact of Containerization, 2:4; 
450 • Notes to Pages 300–306
Litton Systems Inc., “Oceanborne Shipping: Demand and Technol-
ogy Forecast,” June 1968, p. 6- 2.
 22. Fairplay, April 20, 1967, p. 42.
 23. There is a long- standing debate on the extent to which con-
ferences have succeeded in restricting competition and raising prices. 
For recent summaries, see Alan W. Cafruny, Ruling the Waves (Berke-
ley, 1987), and William Sjostrom, “Ocean Shipping Cartels: A Sur -
vey,” Review of Network Economics 3, no. 2 (2004).
 24. Fairplay, August 24, 1967, p. 8; J. McNaughton Sidey, “Trans- 
Atlantic Container Services,” Fairplay, October 5, 1967.
 25. Fairplay, February 9, 1967, p. 41; “U.S. Panel Weight a Box-
ship Accord,” NYT, August 28, 1969.
 26. Hans Stueck, “2 Big German Shipping Lines Plan Merger, 
NYT, July 4, 1969; George Horne, “U.S. Lines Plans 16- Ship Char-
ter,” NYT, October 4, 1969; Werner Bamberger, “Line Sets Its Course 
on Time Charters,” NYT, January 11, 1970.
 27. George Horne, “Grace Line Is Tentatively Sold,” NYT, Febru-
ary 7, 1969; Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, p. 48; Farn-
sworth Fowle, “4 Freighters Sold for $38.4 Million,” NYT, August 6, 
1970; “Cooling the Rate War on the North Atlantic,” Business Week, 
April 29, 1972; “U.S. to Challenge R. J. Reynolds Bid,” NYT, Decem-
ber 15, 1970; Fairplay, July 15, 1971, p. 62, and December 9, 1971, 
p. 45; ICC, Transport Statistics, Part 5, Table 4, 1970 and 1971.
 28. Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, pp. 42 and 57–59; 
UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport 1912–73, p. 97; Gilbert 
Massac, “Le transport maritime par conteneurs: Concentrations et 
globalisation,” Techniques avancées, no. 43 (April 1998); Gunnar K. 
Sletmo and Ernest W. Williams Jr., Liner Conferences in the Con-
tainer Age: U.S. Policy at Sea (New York, 1981), p. 308; “Cooling the 
Rate War.”
 29. Pearson and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 
25; Wallin„ “The Development, Economics, and Impact,” p. 883.
 30. U.S. Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Report of the 
President (Washington, DC, 1982), p. 356; UNCTAD, Review of 
Maritime Transport 1974, p. 40.
 31. UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport 1972–73, p. 96; 
Pearson and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, pp. 25, 
220; Clare M. Reckert, “R. J. Reynolds Profit Up 3% in Quarter,” 
NYT, February 13, 1975; “Their Ship’s Finally Come In,” NYT, Sep-
tember 8, 1974.
Notes to Pages 307–313 • 451
 32. UNCTAD, Handbook of International Trade and Develop-
ment Statistics 1981 Supplement (New York, 1982), p. 45; UNC-
TAD, Review of Maritime Transport 1975, p. 36, and 1976, p. 32; 
Robert Lindsey “Pacific Shipping Rate War Flares, Mostly on Soviet 
Vessel Build- Up,” NYT, July 4, 1975.
 33. On costs, see Sletmo and Williams, Liner Conferences, pp. 
147 and 156. Peninsula & Oriental, a major British ship line, an-
nounced in 1968 that its planning was based on the assumption that 
the Suez Canal was closed permanently, and other carriers appear to 
have made the same choice; see Fairplay, July 4, 1968, p. 79, and 
Pearson and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 248.
 34. Relative fuel costs appear in Sletmo and Williams, Liner Con-
ferences, p. 162. Opposition by Sea- Land’s board to the SL- 7 pur-
chase is discussed in John Boylston interview, COHP.
 35. On relations between Sea- Land and R. J. Reynolds, see Tursi, 
White, and McQuilkin, Lost Empire, chaps. 15–16 and 23; R. J. 
Reynolds Industries, Annual Reports from 1975 through 1980; tran-
script of R. J. Reynolds Industries Analyst Meeting, September 19–
21, 1976; and comment from R. J. Reynolds Industries’ chief finan-
cial officer Gwain H. Gillespie at analyst presentation, November 1, 
1984, p. 78. These and other relevant R. J. Reynolds documents are 
available on a Web site that archives documents gathered in conjunc-
tion with antitobacco litigation, https://industrydocuments.library 
.ucsf.edu/tobacco/.
 36. Colin Jones, “Heading for a Period of Consolidation,” Finan-
cial Times, January 15, 1976.
Chapter 12 
The Bigness Complex
 1. Author’s telephone interview with Earl Hall, May 21, 1993; 
“Malcom McLean’s $750 Million Gamble,” Business Week, April 
16, 1979.
 2. “Pinehurst Club Is Sold for $9- Million,” NYT, January 1, 
1971; author’s telephone interview with Dena Van Dyk, May 2, 
1994; William Robbins, “Vast Plantation Is Carved Out of North 
Carolina Wilderness,” NYT, May 8, 1974; Business Week, April 1, 
1979.
 3. Sletmo and Williams, Liner Conferences, p. 39.
 4. Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, September 1982, p. 9; Pearson 
452 • Notes to Pages 314–319
and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 220; UNCTAD, 
Review of Maritime Transport, various issues.
 5. Michael Kuby and Neil Reid, “Technological Change and the 
Concentration of the U.S. General Cargo Port System: 1970–88,” 
Economic Geography 68, no. 3 (1993): 279.
 6. American Association of Port Authorities; Marad, “Contain-
erized Cargo Statistics,” various years; Pearson and Fossey, World 
Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 29; Containerisation International 
Yearbook, various years. The figures for this period must be inter -
preted cautiously, because the statistical definition of “container” had 
not yet been standardized in terms of 20- foot units, and individual 
ports’ statistics did not always distinguish between loaded and empty 
containers.
 7. Hugh Turner, Robert Windle, and Martin Dresner, “North 
American Containerport Productivity: 1984–1997,” Transportation 
Research Part E (2003): 354.
 8. Yehuda Hayut, “Containerization and the Load Center Con-
cept,” Economic Geography 57, no. 2 (1981): 170.
 9. Brian Slack, “Pawns in the Game: Ports in a Global Transpor -
tation System,” Growth and Change 24, no. 4 (1993): 579–588; 
Kuby and Reid, “Technological Change,” p. 280; Containerisation 
International Yearbook, 1988.
 10. Port of Seattle, Marine Planning and Development Depart-
ment, “Container Terminal Development Plan,” October 1991; Ei-
leen Rhea Rabach, “By Sea: The Port Nexus in the Global Commod-
ity Network (The Case of the West Coast Ports)” (Ph.D. diss., 
University of Southern California, 2002), p. 86. Rabach’s assertion 
that port competition is a zero- sum game is not correct; as this study 
argues, declining costs throughout the transportation system have 
stimulated the flow of international trade.
 11. UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport 1979, p. 29; Marad, 
“United States Port Development Expenditure Report,” 1991; Her -
man L. Boschken, Strategic Design and Organizational Change: Pa-
cific Rim Seaports in Transition (Tuscaloosa, 1988), pp. 61–65. On 
the Oakland dredging saga, see Christopher B. Busch, David L. Kirp, 
and Daniel F. Schoenholz, “Taming Adversarial Legalism: The Port of 
Oakland’s Dredging Saga Revisited,” Legislation and Public Policy 2, 
no. 2 (1999): 179–216; Ronald E. Magden, The Working Longshore-
man (Tacoma, 1996), p. 190.
Notes to Pages 319–328 • 453
 12. Fairplay, July 3, 1975, p. 37; Slack, “Pawns in the Game,” p. 
582; Turner, Windle, and Dresner, “North American Containerport 
Productivity,” p. 351; author’s interview with Mike Beritzhoff, Oak-
land, CA, January 25, 2005.
 13. Boschken, Strategic Design, p. 200.
 14. Hans J. Peters, “Private Sector Involvement in East and South -
east Asian Ports: An Overview of Contractual Arrangements,” Infra-
structure Notes, World Bank, March 1995.
 15. Pearson and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping.
 16. Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, January 1983, p. 10.
 17. Ibid., p. 12 and March 1985, p. 4.
 18. Daniel Machalaba, “McLean Bets That Jumbo Freighter Fleet 
Can Revive Industry,” Wall Street Journal, September 26, 1986; Ron 
Katims interview, COHP.
 19. Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, p. 95.
 20. Ibid., p. 84; Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, April 1984, p. 7, 
and March 1986, p. 3; UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport 
1989, p. 25; JOC, October 15, 1986.
 21. Bruce Barnard, “Evergreen Set to Drop Felixstowe,” JOC, 
October 22, 1986; Machalaba, “McLean Bets”; Kuby and Reid, 
“Technological Change,” p. 279.
 22. Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, January 1987; Gibson and Don-
ovan, The Abandoned Ocean, p. 218; Susan F. Rasky, “Bankruptcy 
Step Taken by McLean,” NYT, November 25, 1986.
 23. The bankruptcy filing, In re McLean Industries, Inc., was in 
the Southern District of New York, case numbers 86- 12238 through 
86- 12241. This paragraph draws on docket nos. 106, 107, 111, 133, 
and 163. On the vessel sale, see Daniel Machalaba, “Sea- Land Will 
Buy 12 Superfreighters Idled by U.S. Lines Inc. for $160 Million,” 
Wall Street Journal, February 9, 1988.
 24. Author’s interview with Gerald Toomey, May 5, 1993; Daniel 
Machalaba, “Container Shipping’s Inventor Plans to Start Florida–
Puerto Rico Service,” Wall Street Journal, January 31, 1992. For the 
views of a former U.S. Lines employee, see “McLean Doesn’t Deserve 
Award,” letter to the editor, JOC, September 16, 1992.
 25. R. M. Katims, “Keynote Address: Terminal of the Future,” in 
National Research Council, Transportation Research Board, Facing 
the Challenge: The Intermodal Terminal of the Future (Washington, 
DC, 1986), pp. 1–3.
454 • Notes to Pages 329–334
Chapter 13 
The Shippers’ Revenge
 1. Comment of Karl Heinz Sager cited in Broeze, The Globalisa -
tion of the Oceans, p. 41.
 2. UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport 1975, p. 43.
 3. Fairplay, July 15, 1971, pp. 47 and 53. UNCTAD’s estimated 
shipping costs were:
 4. Matson Research Corp., The Impact of Containerization, pp. 
40–41; Fairplay, February 1, 1968, p. 8.
 5. OECD, “Ocean Freight Rates as Part of Total Transport 
Costs” (Paris, 1968), p. 24.
 6. Antwerp data taken from Bremer Ausschuß für Wirtschafts-
forschung, Container Facilities. Dart Container Line spent nearly 
$300,000 in 1973 on a computer to keep track of its 20,000 contain-
ers. Fairplay, April 5, 1973, p. 40. By 1974, U.S. Lines was spending 
$1.7 million a year to operate its computers; see Fairplay, April 4, 
1974, p. 76.
 7. Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, pp. 55–56. World-
wide, the containerships entering the fleet in 1973 traveled at an av-
erage speed of 25 knots, compared with 20 knots or less for almost 
all breakbulk and containerships built before 1968. Wallin, “The 
Development, Economics, and Impact,” p. 642. The 85 percent 
breakeven point is cited in U.S. Congress, Office of Technology As-
sessment, An Assessment of Maritime Technology and Trade (Wash-
ington, DC, 1983), p. 71. Three ship lines surveyed by J. E. Davies in 
1980 reported that their fixed costs were between 53 and 65 percent 
of total costs, implying much lower breakeven points; “An Analysis 
of Cost and Supply Conditions in the Liner Shipping Industry,” Jour-
nal of Industrial Economics 31, no. 4 (1983): 420.
 8. Fairplay, February 4, 1971.
Average Cost of Handling One Cubic Meter of Freight, 1970
Capital  
Cost
Operating  
Cost
Cargo  
Handling
Total  
Cost
Conventional ship $2.30 $3.81 $17.00 $23.11
Containership $2.50 $2.47 $5.90 $10.87
Source: UNCTAD.
Notes to Pages 335–336 • 455
 9. Sletmo and Williams, Liner Conferences, chap. 5; Benjamin 
Bridgman, “Energy Prices and the Expansion of World Trade,” Work-
ing Paper, Louisiana State University, November 2003. Fuel cost as a 
share of operating costs are given in Office of Technology Assess-
ment, An Assessment of Maritime Technology and Trade, p. 71. The 
International Monetary Fund cites the increase in market concentra-
tion in shipping following the introduction of containers as another 
reason for the failure of shipping rates to fall. However, it is not at all 
clear that pooling agreements and other anticompetitive practices 
succeeded in holding shipping rates above competitive levels for ex-
tended periods. International Monetary Fund, World Economic Out-
look, September 2002, p. 116; Sjostrom, “Ocean Shipping Cartels,” 
pp. 107–134.
 10. Fairplay, July 15, 1974, p. 50. In principle, it should be pos-
sible to quantify transport- cost saving over time by comparing a 
country’s imports under two different definitions, free on board 
(f.o.b.), which represents the value of merchandise at the point of 
export, and cost of insurance and freight (c.i.f.), which is the value at 
the point of import, including transport costs. In practice, however, 
the difference between c.i.f. and f.o.b. imports provides little guid-
ance concerning freight cost trends. The accuracy of the underlying 
data is questionable; if IMF figures are to be believed, insurance and 
freight accounted for a mere 1 percent of Switzerland’s imports as 
long ago as 1960. Data for countries with large- scale trade in bulk 
products, such as coal and oil, may not reflect changes affecting man-
ufactured goods. More problematic, the use of aggregate c.i.f. and 
f.o.b. data assumes that the composition and origin of imports have 
not changed over time. Scott L. Baier and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, “The 
Growth of World Trade: Tariffs, Transport Costs, and Income Simi-
larity,” Journal of International Economics 53, no. 1 (2001): 1–27, 
show that for 16 wealthy nations, transport fell from 8.2 percent to 
4.3 percent of import value between 1958–60 and 1986–88, but the 
various factors cited above make this conclusion unpersuasive.
 11. Indexes of “tramp” charter rates were compiled during the 
1960s and 1970s by several sources, including the Norwegian Ship-
ping News and the British Chamber of Shipping. The price for a 
single- voyage charter, adjusted for the capacity of the vessel, yields a 
vessel cost per ton shipped. Japanese shippers were the tramps’ main 
customers. The tramp market was somnolent in the early 1970s, and 
it appears that most tramp charters involved bulk freight rather than 
456 • Notes to Pages 336–340
breakbulk freight of the sort that would have been competitive with 
container shipping. Fairplay, July 1, 1971, p. 73.
 12. The German Liner Index did not purport to measure rates on 
freight in other parts of the world. As UNCTAD pointed out, it did 
not fully reflect changes in rates or surcharges and was “rather nar -
rowly based and greatly influenced by declining currency exchange 
ratios of the Deutschmark versus the United States dollar.” See UNC-
TAD, Review of Maritime Transport 1972–73, p. 81, and 1984, p. 
42. It also appears that the index as published in the 1960s and 
1970s did not clearly distinguish liner freight rates overall from con-
tainer shipping rates. The index as published in the 1990s did make 
this distinction, revealing very different trends. The index for all liner 
rates, for example, fell from 101 in January 1994 to 96 in June 1997, 
whereas the subindex for container rates fell much more steeply, 
from 101 to 90, during the same period. See UNCTAD, Review of 
Maritime Transport 1997, p. 50. For more discussion of both indexes 
and an attempt to adjust them for inflation, see Hummels, “Have 
International Transportation Costs Declined?”
 13. For the Hansen index, see Fairplay, January 15, 1981, p. 15.
 14. Tursi, White, and McQuilkin, Lost Empire, p. 185.
 15. UNCTAD’s annual Review of Maritime Transport provides 
data on container shipping in developing countries; see also Pearson 
and Fossey, World Deep- Sea Container Shipping, p. 27. The contain-
erized share of U.S. imports appears in the Review for 1974, p. 51.
 16. Sletmo and Williams, Liner Conferences, p. 80. Hummels, 
“Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of 
Globalization,” disputes the view that containerization led to lower 
ocean freight rates.
 17. According to Pacific Maritime Association data, base wages 
for longshoremen on the U.S. Pacific Coast nearly doubled, from 
$3.88 per hour in July 1966 to $7.52 in July 1976. Data available at 
www.pmanet.org. At U.S. North Atlantic ports, longshoremen who 
were entitled to four weeks’ vacation and eleven paid holidays in 
1966 were eligible for six weeks’ vacation and thirteen paid holidays 
by the early 1970s. Longshore News, November 1969, p. 4A.
 18. OECD, “Ocean Freight Rates as Part of Total Transport 
Costs,” p. 31.
 19. Hummels, “Have International Transportation Costs De-
clined?”; Fairplay, May 16, 1968, p. 49.
 20. On New Zealand, see Fairplay, February 19, 1976, p. 3.
Notes to Pages 341–344 • 457
 21. No accurate measures of insurance- rate changes are available. 
Insurers initially resisted lowering rates for container shipments, 
mainly with the reasoning that container shipping might lead to less 
frequent but larger losses if an entire container were stolen or dam-
aged. In addition, a full container was usually handed off from one 
carrier to another without being opened, making it difficult to deter-
mine which carrier was responsible if damage did occur. Fairplay, 
September 2, 1971; Insurance Institute of London, “An Examination 
of the Changing Nature of Cargo Insurance Following the Introduc-
tion of Containers,” January 1969. By 1973, an insurance expert was 
ready to admit that “cargoes carried in containers appear to be 
bringing improved claims experience.” Fairplay, July 5, 1973, p. 55.
 22. Marad, “Current Trends in Port Pricing” (Washington, DC, 
1978), p. 19.
 23. Real oil prices in dollar terms rose until 1981; see U.S. De-
partment of Energy, Annual Energy Review (Washington, DC, 2003), 
Table 5.21. The German liner- freight index discussed above also 
began to decline in the late 1970s, after adjustment for inflation.
 24. Pedro L. Marin and Richard Sicotte, “Exclusive Contracts 
and Market Power: Evidence from Ocean Shipping,” Discussion 
Paper 2028, Centre for Economic Policy Research, June 2001; com-
ment from J. G. Payne, vice chairman of Blue Star Line, in Fairplay, 
April 11, 1974, p. 7.
 25. The former competitors involved in the North Atlantic Pool 
were American Export–Isbrandtsen Line, Belgian Line, Bristol City 
Line, Clarke Traffic Services, Cunard Line, French Line, Hamburg- 
American Line, Holland- America Line, North German Lloyd, Sea- 
Land Service, Seatrain Lines, Swedish American Lines, Swedish 
Transatlantic Lines, United States Lines, and Wallenius Line. On 
shippers’ councils, see U.S. General Accounting Office, Changes in 
Federal Maritime Regulation Can Increase Efficiency and Reduce 
Costs in the Ocean Liner Shipping Industry (Washington, DC, 1982), 
chap. 5. UNCTAD encouraged the formation of regional shippers’ 
councils, which were formed in Central America, East Africa, and 
Southeast Asia.
 26. Fairplay, July 1, 1971; UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Trans-
port 1972–73, p. 80, and 1975, p. 44.
 27. Office of Technology Assessment, An Assessment of Maritime 
Technology and Trade, p. 72.
 28. U.S. General Accounting Office, Centralized Department of 
458 • Notes to Pages 345–351
Defense Management of Cargo Shipped in Containers Would Save 
Millions and Improve Service (Washington, DC, 1977).
 29. Author’s telephone interview with Cliff Sayre, former vice 
president of transportation at DuPont, January 24, 1992.
 30. According to Sayre, DuPont had more than fifty loyalty agree -
ments and had relationships with more than three hundred individ-
ual ocean carriers in 1978.
 31. Prior to containerization, Evergreen Line operated as a non-
conference carrier on the Japan–Red Sea route, pricing 10 to 15 per-
cent below conference rate. On the Japan–India route, however, Ev-
ergreen decided to join the conference after finding that Japanese 
steel mills would not use its services because they had loyalty agree-
ments with the conference. See Fairplay, August 9, 1973, p. 60.
 32. Broeze, The Globalisation of the Oceans, p. 65.
 33. Fairplay, September 21, 1972, p. 11; November 23, 1972, p. 
59; and June 28, 1973, p. 44; Eric Pace, “Freighters’ Rate War Hurt-
ing U.S. Exporters,” NYT, September 11, 1980; Fairplay, February 
12, 1981, p. 9.
 34. James C. Nelson, “The Economic Effects of Transport De-
regulation in Australia,” Transport Journal 16, no. 2 (1976): 48–71.
 35. U.S. General Accounting Office, Issues in Regulating Inter -
state Motor Carriers (Washington, DC, 1980), p. 35.
 36. Matson Research Corp., The Impact of Containerization, 
2:64; U.S. General Accounting Office, Combined Truck/Rail Trans-
portation Service: Action Needed to Enhance Effectiveness (Wash-
ington, DC, 1977). One company reported in 1978 that sending a 
trailer on a flatcar the 1,068 miles from Minneapolis to Atlanta cost 
$723; the cost of through trucking service for the same commodity 
was $693. See Frederick J. Beier and Stephen W. Frick, “The Limits 
of Piggyback: Light at the End of the Tunnel,” Transportation Jour-
nal 18, no. 2 (1978): 17.
 37. Iain Wallace, “Containerization at Canadian Ports,” Annals 
of the Association of American Geographers 65, no. 3 (1976): 444; 
“The ‘Minibridge’ That Makes the ILA Boil,” Business Week, May 
19, 1975; General Accounting Office, American Seaports—Changes 
Affecting Operations and Development (Washington, DC, 1979); 
Lee Dembart, “ ‘Minibridge’ Shipping Is Raising Costs and Costing 
Jobs in New York,” NYT, February 27, 1977; Marad, “Current 
Trends in Port Pricing,” p. 20.
 38. The role of contracts in changing the economics of freight 
Notes to Pages 352–355 • 459
transportation has generally been neglected. For an exploration of 
the issue, see Marc Levinson, “Two Cheers for Discrimination: De-
regulation and Efficiency in the Reform of U.S. Freight Transporta-
tion, 1976–1998,” Enterprise and Society 10 (2008): 178–215. See 
also Robert E. Gallamore, “Regulation and Innovation: Lessons 
from the American Railroad Industry,” in Essays in Transportation 
Economics and Policy: A Handbook in Honor of John R. Meyer, ed. 
José A. Gómez- Ibañez, William B. Tye, and Clifford Winston (Wash-
ington, DC, 1999), p. 515. Number of contracts appears in Wayne K. 
Talley, “Wage Differentials of Intermodal Transportation Carriers 
and Ports: Deregulation versus Regulation,” Review of Network 
Economics 3, no. 2 (2004): 209. Clifford Winston, Thomas M. Corsi, 
Curtis M. Grimm, and Carol A. Evans, The Economic Effects of Sur-
face Freight Deregulation (Washington, DC, 1990), p. 41, estimate 
the total saving from deregulation at $20 billion in 1988 dollars, 
with the loss to railroad and trucking workers estimated at $3 bil-
lion.
 39. Gallamore, “Regulation and Innovation, p. 516; John F. 
Strauss Jr., The Burlington Northern: An Operational Chronology, 
1970–1995, chap. 6, available online at www.fobnr.org/bnstore/ch6 
.htm; Kuby and Reid, “Technological Change,” p. 282. Paul Stephen 
Dempsey, “The Law of Intermodal Transportation: What It Was, 
What It Is, What It Should Be,” Transportation Law Journal 27, no. 
3 (2000), looks at the history of regulations governing intermodal 
freight.
 40. Robert C. Waters, “The Military Sealift Command versus the 
U.S. Flag Liner Operators,” Transportation Journal 28, no. 4 (1989): 
30–31.
 41. Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, various issues; Hans J. Peters, 
“The Commercial Aspects of Freight Transport: Ocean Transport: 
Freight Rates and Tariffs,” World Bank Infrastructure Notes, January 
1991; author’s interview with William Hubbard; Daniel M. Bern-
hofen, Zouheir El- Sahli, and Richard Kneller, “Estimating the Effects 
of the Container Revolution on World Trade.”
Chapter 14 
Just in Time
 1. Paul Lukas, “Mattel: Toy Story,” Fortune Small Business, 
April 18, 2003; Holiday Dmitri, “Barbie’s Taiwanese Homecoming,” 
460 • Notes to Pages 357–360
Reason, May 2005. For discussion of the toy industry’s supply 
chains, see Francis Snyder, “Global Economic Networks and Global 
Legal Pluralism,” European University Institute Working Paper Law 
No. 99/6, August 1999.
 2. This description of just- in- time procedures is taken from 
G.J.R. Linge, “Just- in- Time: More or Less Flexible?” Economic Ge-
ography 67, no. 4 (1991): 316–332.
 3. The counts, drawn from approximately a thousand business 
and management periodicals, are taken from Paul D. Larson and H. 
Barry Spraggins, “The American Railroad Industry: Twenty Years 
after Staggers,” Transportation Quarterly 52, no. 2 (2000): 37; Rob-
ert C. Lieb and Robert A. Miller, “JIT and Corporate Transportation 
Requirements,” Transportation Journal 27, no. 3 (1988): 5–10; au-
thor’s interview with Cliff Sayre.
 4. According to calculations based on the U.S. National Income 
and Product Accounts, private nonfarm inventories in 2004 averaged 
about $1.65 trillion, or about 13 percent of final sales. Through the 
early 1980s, the ratio was in the range of 22 to 25 percent. That 9 
percentage point reduction measured against 2004 final sales of 
$12.2 trillion yields an annual saving approaching $1.1 trillion. An 
alternative measurement examines the average length of time goods 
are held in inventory by retailers, wholesalers, and manufacturers. 
Analyzed in this way, if inventories had risen at the same rate as sales 
since the early 1980s, U.S. department and discount stores would 
have kept an additional $30 billion of stock on average during 2000, 
durable goods manufacturers would have held an additional $240 
billion of inventories, manufacturers of nondurables would have had 
inventories about $40 billion higher than the actual number, and 
wholesale inventories might have been $30–$40 billion higher. This 
method yields a decline in average inventories relative to sales in 
these sectors of more than $400 billion. See U.S. Census Bureau, 
Monthly Retail Trade Report, and Hong Chen, Murray Z. Brank, 
and Owen Q. Wu, “U.S. Retail and Wholesale Inventory Performance 
from 1981 to 2003,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia, 
2005.
 5. On earlier forms of globalization, see Kevin H. O’Rourke and 
Jeffrey G. Williamson, Globalization and History: The Evolution of 
a Nineteenth- Century Atlantic Economy (Cambridge, MA, 1999), 
and O’Rourke and Williamson, “When Did Globalization Begin?” 
Working Paper 7632, NBER, April 2000.
Notes to Pages 360–365 • 461
 6. Robert Feenstra, “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of 
Production in the Global Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 12, no. 4 (1998); Rabach, “By Sea,” p. 203.
 7. David Hummels, “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs,” 
mimeo, University of Chicago, January 1999; Will Martin and Vlad 
Manole, “China’s Emergence as the Workshop of the World,” Work-
ing Paper, World Bank, September 2003. For examples of how global 
sourcing works in practice, see Victor K. Fung, William K. Fung, and 
Yoram (Jerry) Wind, Competing in a Flat World (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2008).
 8. Ximena Clark, David Dollar, and Alejandro Micco, “Port Ef-
ficiency, Maritime Transport Costs, and Bilateral Trade,” Journal of 
Development Economics 74, no. 3 (2004): 417–450.
 9. Erie, Globalizing L.A., p. 208; Miriam Dossal Panjwani, 
“Space as Determinant: Neighbourhoods, Clubs and Other Strate-
gies of Survival,” in Davies et al., Dock Workers, 2:759; Robin Car-
ruthers, Jitendra N. Bajpai, and David Hummels, “Trade and Logis-
tics: An East Asian Perspective,” in East Asia Integrates: A Trade 
Policy Agenda for Shared Growth (Washington, DC, 2003), pp. 
117–137. Figures on private port investment in China are taken from 
the World Bank Private Participation in Infrastructure Database, ppi.
worldbank.org.
 10. David Hummels, “Time as a Trade Barrier,” mimeo, Purdue 
University, July 2001.
 11. Joel Mokyr, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the 
Knowledge Economy (Princeton, 2002), p. 232.
 12. Clark, Dollar, and Micco, “Port Efficiency,” p. 422; Nuno 
Limão and Anthony J. Venables, “Infrastructure, Geographical Dis-
advantage and Transport Costs,” World Bank Economic Review 15, 
no. 3 (2001): 451–479; Robin Carruthers and Jitendra N. Bajpai, 
“Trends in Trade and Logistics: An East Asian Perspective,” Working 
Paper No. 2, Transport Sector Unit, World Bank, 2002.
 13. Clark, Dollar, and Micco, “Port Efficiency,” p. 422; Jakov 
Karmelic, Cedomir Dundovic, and Ines Kolanovic, “Empty Con-
tainer Logistics,” Transport Logistics Review 24 (2012): 223–230; 
Jean- Paul Rodrigue, Claude Comtois, and Brian Slack, The Geogra-
phy of Transport Systems (Abingdon, UK, 2009), ch. 5. For data on 
U.S. grain exports by container, see U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Marketing Service, Grain Transportation Report.
 14. Increase in shipping volume cited in Carruthers and Bajpai, 
462 • Notes to Pages 368–388
“Trends in Trade and Logistics,” p. 12; on Hamburg, see Dieter Läp-
ple, “Les mutations des ports maritimes et leurs implications pour les 
dockers et les regions portuaires: L’exemple de Hambourg,” in Dock-
ers de la Méditerranée, p. 55.
 15. Alkman Granitsas and Costas Paris, “Chinese Transform 
Greek Port, Winning Over Critics,” WSJ, November 20, 2014; 
Claude Comtois and Peter J. Rimmer, “China’s Competitive Push for 
Global Trade,” in Pinder and Slack, Shipping and Ports, pp. 40–61, 
offer an interesting discussion of the logic behind Chinese port devel-
opment; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Re-
view of Maritime Transport 2014 (New York and Geneva, 2014), p. 
67.
 16. Clark, Dollar, and Micco, “Port Efficiency,” p. 441; United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Review of Maritime 
Transport 2013 (New York and Geneva, 2013), p. 96; World Bank, 
“Tanzania Economic Update, May 2013,” 37.
 17 . Bruce Barnard, “Third 2M Service Adds to Wilhelmshaven 
Momentum,” JOC, December 22, 2014.
Chapter 15 
Adding Value
 1. Fernand Braudel, The Perspective of the World (Berkeley, 
1992), p. 143.
 2. Author’s interview with Jan Blomme, Antwerp, Belgium, Oc-
tober 23, 2014.
 3. Yossi Sheffi, Logistics Clusters: Delivering Value and Driving 
Growth (Cambridge, MA, 2012).
 4. Andrew Gibson and Arthur Donovan articulate in detail the 
connection between U.S. maritime policy and the decline of Ameri-
can shipping; see The Abandoned Ocean.
 5. Chinitz, Freight and the Metropolis, pp. 161–162, 100. For 
examples of such studies, see A. D. Little, Containerisation on the 
North Atlantic; Litton Systems Inc., “Oceanborne Shipping: Demand 
and Technology Forecast,” June 1968, p. 6- 2.
 6. UNCTAD reports worldwide container throughput in 2013 
to have been 651 million TEUs. This statistic would have double 
counted each container. See Review of Maritime Transport 2014, p. 
65.
 7. Jeffrey C. Mays, “Newark Sees Cash in Containers,” Star- 
Note to Page 389 • 463
Ledger, February 4, 2004; Natural Resources Defense Council, 
“Harboring Pollution: The Dirty Truth about U.S. Ports” (New York, 
2004); Deborah Schoch, “Pollution Task Force to Meet for Last Time 
on L.A. Port,” Los Angeles Times, June 21, 2005.
 8. Allianz, Safety and Shipping Review 2015; Organisation for 
Economic Co- operation and Development, International Transport 
Forum, The Impact of Mega- Ships (Paris, 2015), p. 19. Among the 
early proposals for offshore ports was one at Scapa Flow on the 
Orkney Islands, off the northern coast of Scotland. As envisioned, 
huge ships arriving from Asia or North America would make such a 
location their only port of call in northern Europe; the savings in 
ships’ port and sailing times were estimated to more than make up 
for the additional cost of transshipping the containers. See Scottish 
Executive, “Container Transshipment and Demand for Container 
Terminal Capacity in Scotland” (prepared by Transport Research In-
stitute, Napier University, December 2003).

Bibliography
Archival Collections
Containerization Oral History Project, National Museum of Ameri-
can History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.
International Longshoremen’s Association District 1 Files, 1954–56, 
Kheel Center, Catherwood Library, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
International Longshoremen’s Association Files, Robert F. Wagner 
Labor Archives, New York University, New York, NY.
Mayor Abraham Beame Papers, New York Municipal Archives, New 
York, NY.
Mayor John V. Lindsay Papers, New York Municipal Archives, New 
York, NY.
Mayor Robert F. Wagner Papers, New York Municipal Archives, 
New York, NY.
National Archives and Records Administration, Modern Military 
Records Branch, College Park, MD.
Operational Archives Branch, Naval Historical Center, Washington, 
DC.
Penn Central Transportation Company Archives, Hagley Museum 
and Library, Wilmington, DE.
Port of New York Authority Records (Doig Files), New Jersey State 
Archives, Trenton, NJ.
Regional Oral History Program, Bancroft Library, University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley, CA.
Robert B. Meyner Papers, New Jersey State Archives, Trenton, NJ.
Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives, New York University, New York, 
NY.
Robert F. Wagner Papers, LaGuardia and Wagner Archives, LaGuar-
dia Community College, Queens, NY.
U.S. Army Materiel Command Historical Office, Fort Belvoir, VA.
Vernon H. Jensen Papers, Kheel Center, Catherwood Library, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, NY.
466 • Bibliography
U.S. Government Documents
Interstate Commerce Commission. Motor Carrier Cases.
——— . Revenue and Traffic of Carriers by Water. 1952–64.
——— . Reports.
——— . Transport Statistics in the United States. 1954–74.
Interstate Commerce Commission, Bureau of Transport Economics 
and Statistics. Monthly Comment on Transportation Statistics.  
1945–April 1955.
——— . Transport Economics. May 1955–December 1957.
Office of Technology Assessment. An Assessment of Maritime Trade 
and Technology. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
fice, 1983.
U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers. Waterborne Commerce of the United 
States. Annual.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Manufactures. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, various years.
——— . County Business Patterns. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern -
ment Printing Office, various years.
——— . Historical Statistics of the United States. 2 vols. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975.
——— . U.S. Census of Population and Housing.  Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office, various years.
U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee. Discriminatory Ocean 
Freight Rates and the Balance of Payments. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1964.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Na-
tional Income and Product Accounts.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Federal Maritime Board and Mari-
time Administration. Annual Reports.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Bureau of Transportation Statis-
tics. Transportation Statistics Annual Report. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Transportation, 1994–2004.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Maritime Administration. 
United States Port Development Expenditure Report, 1946–1989. 
Washington, DC: Office of Port and Intermodal Development, 
1989.
U.S. Economic Stabilization Program, Pay Board. “East and Gulf 
Coast Longshore Contract.” May 2, 1972.
U.S. General Accounting Office. American Seaports— Changes Af-
Bibliography • 467
fecting Operations and Development. Washington, DC: GAO 
1979.
——— . Centralized Department of Defense Management of Cargo 
Shipped in Containers Would Save Millions and Improve Service. 
Washington, DC: GAO, 1977.
——— . Changes in Federal Maritime Regulation Can Increase Effi-
ciency and Reduce Costs in the Ocean Liner Shipping Industry.  
Washington, DC: GAO, 1982.
——— . Combined Truck/Rail Transportation Service: Action Needed 
to Enhance Effectiveness. Washington, DC: GAO, 1977.
——— . Issues in Regulating Interstate Motor Carriers. Washington, 
DC: GAO, 1980.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Merchant Marine and 
Fisheries. Cargo Container Dimensions. October 31 and Novem-
ber 1, 8, and 16, 1967. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office, 1968.
——— . Hearings on HR 8637, To Facilitate Private Financing of 
New Ship Construction. April 9, 27, 28, 29, and 30, 1954.
——— . Study of Harbor Conditions in Los Angeles and Long Beach 
Harbor. October 19–21, 1955 and July 16, 1956.
U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Roll- On, Roll- Off Sea Transpor-
tation. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1957.
U.S. National Research Council. Research Techniques in Marine 
Transportation. Publication 720. Washington, DC: National 
Academy of Sciences, 1959.
U.S. National Research Council, Maritime Cargo Transportation 
Conference. Cargo Ship Loading. Publication 474. Washington, 
DC: National Academy of Sciences 1957.
——— . The SS Warrior. Publication 339. Washington, DC: National 
Academy of Sciences, 1954.
——— . Transportation of Subsistence to NEAC. Washington, DC: 
National Academy of Sciences 1956.
U.S. National Research Council, Transportation Research Board. 
Facing the Challenge: The Intermodal Terminal of the Future.  
Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 1986.
Other Government Documents
Arthur D. Little, Inc. Community Renewal Programming: A San 
Francisco Case Study. New York, 1966.
468 • Bibliography
Board of Inquiry into Waterfront Labor Conditions, New York 1951.
Booz- Allen & Hamilton. “General Administrative Survey of the Port 
of Seattle.” January 20, 1958.
British Railways Board. The Reshaping of British Railways, Part 1. 
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1963,
New York City Planning Commission. “The Port of New York: Pro-
posals for Development.” 1964.
New York City Planning Commission. “Redevelopment of Lower 
Manhattan East River Piers.” September 1959.
——— . The Waterfront. New York, 1971.
New York State Department of Labor. “Employment Conditions in 
the Longshore Industry.” Industrial Bulletin 31, no. 2 (1952).
——— . Population and Income Statistics.
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Foreign Trade 1976.
Port of New York Authority (subsequently Port Authority of New 
York and New Jersey). Annual Reports.
——— . Container Shipping: Full Ahead. 1967.
——— . Marine Terminal Survey of the New Jersey Waterfront. Feb-
ruary 10, 1949.
——— . Metropolitan Transportation 1980.
——— . Outlook for Waterborne Commerce through the Port of 
New York. 1948.
——— . The Port of New York. 1952.
——— . “Proposal for Development of the Municipally Owned Wa-
terfront and Piers of New York City.” February 10, 1948.
——— . Via—Port of New York.
Port of Seattle, Marine Planning and Development Department. 
“Container Terminal Development Plan.” October 1991.
Port of Seattle, Planning and Research Department. “A Conceptual 
Framework for the Physical Development of the Port of Seattle.” 
April 1966.
Port of Singapore Authority. Annual Report and Accounts. Various 
years.
——— . A Review of the Past and a Look into the Future. Singapore: 
Port of Singapore Authority, 1971.
Scottish Executive. “Container Transshipment and Demand for Con-
tainer Terminal Capacity in Scotland.” Transport Research Insti-
tute, Napier University, Edinburgh, December 2003.
Seattle Port Commission. “Container Terminals 1970–1975: A De-
velopment Strategy.” November 1969.
Bibliography • 469
——— . “Report of the Marine Terminals Task Force to the Citizens’ 
Port Committee.” 1959.
——— . “Review of Port Development and Financing.” December 
1968.
——— . Shipping Statistics Handbook. 1963.
State of New York. Record of the Public Hearing Held by Governor 
Thomas E. Dewey on the Recommendations of the New York 
State Crime Commission for Remedying Conditions on the Water-
front of the Port of New York. June 8–9, 1953.
Tippetts- Abbett- McCarthy- Stratton. Shoreside Facilities for Trail -
ership, Trainship, and Containership Services. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Maritime Administration, 1956.
UK Department for Transport. “Recent Developments and Prospects 
at UK Container Ports.” London, 2000.
——— . Transport Statistics Report: Maritime Statistics 2002. Lon-
don, 2003. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor. Annual 
Reports.
International Agency Documents
International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook. September 
2002.
Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development, Inter -
national Transport Forum. The Impact of Mega- Ships. Paris, 
2015.
______. “Ocean Freight Rates as Part of Total Transport Costs.” 
Paris, 1968.
Pan American Union. Recent Developments in the Use and Handling 
of Unitized Cargoes. Document UP/CIES- 8 ES- CTPP- Doc. 12. 
Washington, DC, 1964.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Review of 
Maritime Transport. Annual.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. “An Ex-
amination of Some Aspects of the Unit- Load System of Cargo 
Shipments: Application to Developing Countries.” 1966.
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific. Commercial Development of Regional Ports as Logistics 
Centres. New York, 2002.
World Bank. East Asia Integrates: A Trade Policy Agenda for Shared 
Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2003.
470 • Bibliography
World Trade Organization. World Trade Report 2004. Geneva, 
2005.
Private Reports and Documents
A. D. Little. Containerisation on the North Atlantic. London: Na -
tional Ports Council, 1967.
AOTOS Awards. Program. 1984.
Association of American Railroads. Carloads of Revenue Freight 
Loaded.
Containerization and Intermodal Institute. Containerization: The 
First 25 Years. New York, 1981.
Downtown–Lower Manhattan Association. “Lower Manhattan.” 
1958.
First National City Bank. “The Port of New York: Challenge and 
Opportunity.” 1967.
Insurance Institute of London, Advanced Study Group No. 188. “An 
Examination of the Changing Nature of Cargo Insurance follow-
ing the Introduction of Containers.” 1969.
International Cargo Handling Coordination Association. “Contain-
erization Symposium Proceedings, New York City, June 15, 1955.”
International Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union. “Report 
of the Officers to the Thirteenth Biennial Convention.” April 6–7, 
1959.
Litton Systems Inc. “Oceanborne Shipping: Demand and Technology 
Forecast.” Report for U.S. Department of Transportation, Office 
of the Secretary, June 1968.
Matson Research Corporation. The Impact of Containerization on 
the U.S. Economy. 2 vols. Report for U.S. Department of Com -
merce, September 1970.
McKinsey & Co. “Containerization: A 5- Year Balance Sheet.” 1972.
——— . “Containerization: The Key to Low Cost Transport.” Report 
for British Transport Docks Board, June 1967.
McLean Industries Inc. Annual Reports.
Muncy, Dorothy. “Inventory of Port- Oriented Land: Baltimore Re-
gion.” Report for Maryland Economic Development Commission, 
Arlington, VA, 1963.
National Ports Council. Annual Digest of Port Statistics.
——— . Container and Roll- On Port Statistics, Great Britain.
New York Shipping Association. “Progress Report 1959.”
Bibliography • 471
Pacific Maritime Association and International Longshoremen’s and 
Warehousemen’s Union. “Memorandum of Agreement on Mecha-
nization and Modernization.” October 18, 1960.
Pan- Atlantic Steamship Corporation. “Summary of Post–World War 
II Coastwise Operations.” Mimeo, n.d.
Schott, John G. Piggyback and the Future of Freight Transportation. 
Washington, DC: Public Affairs Institute, 1960.
——— . Progress in Piggyback and Containerization. Washington, 
DC: Public Affairs Institute, 1960.
Tantlinger, K. W. “U.S. Containerization: From the Beginning 
through Standardization.” Paper presented to the World Port Con-
ference, Rotterdam, 1982.
Tobin, Austin J. Transportation in the New York Metropolitan Re-
gion during the Next Twenty- five Years. New York: Regional Plan 
Association, 1954.
Woodruff, G. C. “The Container Car as the Solution of the Less 
Than Carload Lot Problem.” Speech to Associated Industries of 
Massachusetts, October 23, 1929.
——— . “Freight Container Service.” Speech to Traffic Club of New 
York, March 25, 1930.
Newspapers and Periodicals
Army Logistician
Baltimore Sun
Brooklyn Eagle
Business Week
Civil Engineering
Containerisation International Yearbook
Containers: Bulletin of the International Container Bureau
Fairplay International Shipping Journal
Jane’s Freight Containers
Journal of Commerce
Longshore News
Marine Engineering/Log
Newark Evening News
News and Observer (Raleigh)
New York
New York Herald Tribune
New York Times
472 • Bibliography
New York World Telegram and Sun
Robesonian
Sealift
Interviews and Oral Histories
Bell, Peter. Interview by Debra Bernhardt, August 29, 1981. New 
Yorkers at Work Oral History Collection, Robert F. Wagner Labor 
Archive, New York University.
Blomme, Jan. Author’s interview, October 23, 2014, Antwerp, 
Belgium.
Boylston, John. Interview by Arthur Donovan and Andrew Gibson, 
December 7, 1998. Containerization Oral History Project, Na -
tional Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC.
Bulcke, Germain. “Longshore Leader and ILWU–Pacific Maritime 
Association Arbitrator.” Interviews by Estolv Ethan Ward, 1983. 
Berkeley: Regional Oral History Office, Bancroft Library, Univer-
sity of California, 1984.
Campbell, Robert N. Author’s telephone interview, June 25, 1993.
Cox, John Parr. “Parr Terminal: Fifty Years of Industry on the Rich-
mond Waterfront.” Interviews by Judith K. Dunning, 1986. Berke-
ley: Regional Oral History Office, Bancroft Library, University of 
California, 1992.
Crowley, Thomas B. “Crowley Maritime Corporation: San Francisco 
Bay Tugboats to International Transportation Fleet.” Interviews 
by Miriam Feingold Stein, 1973–75. Berkeley: Regional Oral His-
tory Office, Bancroft Library, University of California, 1983.
Cushing, Charles. Author’s interviews, New York, NY, April 7, 1993, 
and June 2, 1993.
Czachowski, Bernard. Author’s interview, New York, NY, January 
24, 1992.
Francis, Amadeo. Author’s telephone interview, April 28, 2005.
Gleason, Thomas W. Author’s interview, New York, NY, September 
29, 1992.
——— . Interview by Debra Bernhardt, July 31, 1981. New Yorkers 
at Work Oral History Collection, Robert F. Wagner Labor Ar -
chive, New York University.
Goldblatt, Louis. “Working Class Leader in the ILWU, 1935–1977.” 
Interviews by Estolv Ethan Ward, 1977–78. Berkeley: Regional 
Bibliography • 473
Oral History Office, Bancroft Library, University of California, 
1980.
Grey, Vincent. Author’s telephone interview, May 1, 2005.
Hall, Earl. Author’s telephone interview, May 12, 1993.
Harlander, Les. Author’s telephone interview, November 2, 2004.
——— . Interview by Arthur Donovan and Andrew Gibson, June 19, 
1997. Containerization Oral History Project, National Museum 
of American History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.
Hayden, Frank. Author’s telephone interview, June 29, 2004.
Healey, Richard. Author’s telephone interview, January 9, 1994.
Hooper, Edwin B. “Reminiscences of Vice Admiral Edwin B. Hooper.” 
Annapolis: U.S. Naval Institute, 1978.
Hubbard, William. Author’s telephone interview, July 1, 1993.
Irvin, William D. “Reminiscences of Rear Admiral William D. Irvin.” 
Annapolis: U.S. Naval Institute, 1980.
Katims, Ron. Author’s interview, New York, NY, October 30, 1992.
——— . Interview by Arthur Donovan and Andrew Gibson, August 
15, 1997. Containerization Oral History Project, National Mu -
seum of American History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
DC.
Morrison, Scott. Interview by Arthur Donovan and Andrew Gibson, 
March 27, 1997. Containerization Oral History Project, National 
Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution, Washing-
ton, DC.
Nutter, Ben E. “The Port of Oakland: Modernization and Expansion 
of Shipping, Airport, and Real Estate Operations, 1957–1977.” 
Interview by Ann Lage, 1991. Berkeley: Regional Oral History 
Office, Bancroft Library, University of California, 1994.
Ramage, Lawson P. “Reminiscences of Vice Admiral Lawson P. Ram-
age.” Annapolis: U.S. Naval Institute, 1970.
Richardson, Paul. Author’s interviews, Holmdel, NJ, January 14, 
1992, and July 20, 1992.
Roger, Sidney. “A Liberal Journalist on the Air and on the Water -
front.” Interviews by Julie Shearer, 1989–90. Berkeley: Regional 
Oral History Office, Bancroft Library, University of California, 
1983.
Sayre, Cliff. Author’s telephone interview, January 24, 1992.
Schmidt, Henry. “Secondary Leadership in the ILWU, 1933–1966.” 
Interviews by Miriam F. Stein and Estolv Ethan Ward, 1974, 1975, 
474 • Bibliography
1981. Regional Oral History Office, Bancroft Library, University 
of California, Berkeley, 1983.
Stickles, Milton J. Author’s telephone interview, June 1, 2004.
St. Sure, J. Paul. “Some Comments on Employer Organizations and 
Collective Bargaining in Northern California since 1934.” Inter -
view by Corinne Gilb, 1957. Institute of Industrial Relations Oral 
History Project, University of California, Berkeley, 1957.
Tantlinger, Keith. Author’s interview, San Diego, CA, January 3, 
1993.
Tolan, David J. Interview by Debra Bernhardt, August 1, 1980. New 
Yorkers at Work Oral History Collection, Robert F. Wagner Labor 
Archive, New York University.
Toomey, Gerald. Author’s interview, New York, NY, May 5, 1993.
Tozzoli, Guy F. Author’s interview, New York, NY, January 13, 2004.
Van Dyk, Dena. Author’s telephone interview, May 2, 1994.
Ward, William. ILWU Oral History Collection, viewed July 5, 2004, 
at http://www.ilwu.org/history/oral-histories/bill-ward.cfm.
Wriston, Walter. Author’s interview, New York, NY, June 30, 1992.
Younger, Ken. Author’s telephone interview, December 16, 1991.
Dissertations and Theses
Fitzgerald, Donald. “A History of Containerization in the California 
Maritime Industry: The Case of San Francisco.” Ph.D. diss., Uni-
versity of California at Santa Barbara, 1986.
Holcomb, Kenneth Johnson. “History, Description and Economic 
Analysis of Trailer- on- Flatcar (Piggyback) Transportation.” Ph.D. 
diss., University of Arkansas, 1962.
Rabach, Eileen Rhea. “By Sea: The Port Nexus in the Global Com-
modity Network (The Case of the West Coast Ports).” Ph.D. diss., 
University of Southern California, 2002.
Rosenstein, Mark. “The Rise of Maritime Containerization in the 
Port of Oakland, 1950–1970.” M.A. thesis, New York University, 
2000.
Wallin, Theodore O. “The Development, Economics, and Impact of 
Technological Change in Transportation: The Case of Container-
ization.” Ph.D. diss., Cornell University, 1974.
Winter, Jennifer Marie. “Thirty Years of Collective Bargaining: Jo -
seph Paul St. Sure, Management Labor Negotiator 1902–1966,” 
M.A. thesis, California State University at Sacramento, 1991.
Bibliography • 475
Books
Albion, Robert Greenhalgh. The Rise of New York Port. New York: 
Scribner, 1939. Reprint, 1971.
Arnesen, Eric. Waterfront Workers of New Orleans: Race, Class, and 
Politics, 1863–1923. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Aronowitz, Stanley. From the Ashes of the Old: American Labor and 
America’s Future. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Arthur, W. Brian. Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the 
Economy. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994.
Beckert, Sven. The Monied Metropolis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993.
Bernstein, Peter L. Wedding of the Waters: The Erie Canal and the 
Making of a Great Nation. New York: Norton, 2005.
Borruey, René. Le port de Marseille: Du dock au conteneur. Mar -
seilles: Chambre de commerce et d’industrie Marseille- Provence, 
1994.
Boschken, Herman L. Strategic Design and Organizational Change: 
Pacific Rim Seaports in Transition. Tuscaloosa: University of Ala-
bama Press, 1988.
Braudel, Fernand. The Perspective of the World. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1992.
Bremer Ausschuß für Wirtschaftsforschung. Container Facilities and 
Traffic in 71 Ports of the World Midyear 1970. Bremen: University 
of Bremen, 1971.
Broeze, Frank. The Globalisation of the Oceans: Containerisation 
from the 1950s to the Present. St. John’s, NF, 2002.
Burke, Padraic. A History of the Port of Seattle. Seattle: Port of Se-
attle, 1976.
Cafruny, Alan W. Ruling the Waves: The Political Economy of Inter-
national Shipping. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1987.
Cannato, Vincent J. John Lindsay and His Struggle to Save New 
York. New York: Basic Books, 2001.
Caro, Robert A. The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of 
New York. New York: Knopf, 1974.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolu-
tion in American Business. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1977.
Chinitz, Benjamin. Freight and the Metropolis: The Impact of Amer-
476 • Bibliography
ica’s Transport Revolution on the New York Region. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1960.
Condit, Carl W. The Port of New York. 2 vols. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1980–81.
Cowie, Jefferson. Capital Moves: RCA’s Seventy- Year Quest for 
Cheap Labor. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1999.
Cronon, William. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. 
New York: Norton, 1991.
Cudahy, Brian. Box Boats: How Container Ships Changed the 
World. New York: Fordham University Press, 2006.
Davies, Sam., et al., eds. Dock Workers: International Explorations 
in Comparative Labour History. 2 vols. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate 
Publishers, 2000.
DiFazio, William. Longshoremen: Community and Resistance on the 
Brooklyn Waterfront. South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey, 1985.
Dockers de la Méditerranée à la Mer du Nord. Avignon: ÉDISUD, 
1999.
Doig, Jameson W. Empire on the Hudson: Entrepreneurial Vision 
and Political Power at the Port of New York Authority. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2001.
Donovan, Arthur, and Joseph Bonney. The Box That Changed the 
World: Fifty Years of Container Shipping—An Illustrated History. 
East Windsor, NJ: Commonwealth Business Media, 2006.
Duncan, Beverly, and Stanley Lieberson. Metropolis and Region in 
Transition. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1970.
Elphick, Peter. Liberty: The Ships That Won the War. London: Cha-
tham Publishing, 2001.
Erie, Steven P. Globalizing L.A.: Trade, Infrastructure, and Regional 
Development. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004.
Fairley Lincoln. Facing Mechanization: The West Coast Longshore 
Plan. Los Angeles: University of California at Los Angeles Insti-
tute of Industrial Relations, 1979.
Finlay, William. Work on the Waterfront: Worker Power and Techno-
logical Change in a West Coast Port. Philadelphia: Temple Univer-
sity Press, 1988.
Fishlow, Albert. American Railroads and the Transformation of the 
Antebellum Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1965.
Flynn, Stephen E. America the Vulnerable: How the U.S. Has Failed 
Bibliography • 477
to Secure the Homeland and Protect Its People from Terror. New 
York: Harper Collins, 2004.
Fogel, Robert William. Railroads and American Economic Growth. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1964.
Freeman, Joshua. Working- Class New York. New York: New Press, 
2000.
Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables. The Spa-
tial Economy: Cities, Regions, and International Trade. Cam -
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Fung, Victor K., William K. Fung, and Yoram (Jerry) Wind, Compet-
ing in a Flat World. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Pub-
lishing, 2008.
George, Rose. Ninety Percent of Everything. New York: Metropoli-
tan Books, 2013.
Gibson, Andrew, and Arthur Donovan. The Abandoned Ocean: A 
History of United States Maritime Policy. Columbia: University of 
South Carolina Press, 2000.
Glaskowsky Nicholas A., Jr., ed. Management for Tomorrow. Stan-
ford, CA: Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 1958.
Gómez- Ibañez, José A., William B. Tye, and Clifford Winston, eds. 
Essays in Transportation Economics and Policy: A Handbook in 
Honor of John R. Meyer. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 
1999.
Griffin, John I. The Port of New York. New York: Arco Publishing, 
1959.
Grunwald, Joseph, and Kenneth Flamm. The Global Factory: For -
eign Assembly in International Trade. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, 1985.
Hagel, Otto, and Louis Goldblatt. Men and Machines: A Story about 
Longshoring on the West Coast Waterfront. San Francisco: Pacific 
Maritime Association and International Longshoremen’s and 
Warehousemen’s Union, 1963.
Haig, Robert Murray. Major Economic Factors in Metropolitan 
Growth and Arrangement. New York: Regional Plan Association, 
1927. Reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1974.
Hannes, Matt. The Container Revolution.  Anaheim: Canterbury 
Press, 1996.
Hartman, Paul T. Collective Bargaining and Productivity.  Berkeley 
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1969.
478 • Bibliography
Heilbrun, James. Urban Economics and Public Policy. New York: St. 
Martin’s, 1974.
Heiser, Joseph M. Jr. A Soldier Supporting Soldiers. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Army Center of Military History, 1991.
——— . Vietnam Studies: Logistic Support. Washington, DC: Depart-
ment of the Army, 1974.
Herod, Andrew. Labor Geographies: Workers and the Landscapes of 
Capitalism. New York: Guilford Press, 2001.
Hooper, Edwin B. Mobility Support Endurance: A Story of Naval 
Operational Logistics in the Vietnam War, 1965–1968. Washing-
ton, DC: Naval History Division, 1972.
Hoover, Edgar M., and Raymond Vernon. Anatomy of a Metropolis. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959.
Immer, John R. Container Services of the Atlantic, 2nd ed. Washing-
ton, DC: Work Saving International, 1970.
International Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union. The 
ILWU Story: Two Decades of Militant Unionism. San Francisco: 
ILWU, 1955.
Jensen, Vernon. Hiring of Dock Workers and Employment Practices 
in the Ports of New York, Liverpool, London, Rotterdam, and 
Marseilles. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1964.
——— . Strife on the Waterfront. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 
1974.
Kessner, Thomas. Fiorello H. LaGuardia and the Making of Modern 
New York. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1989.
Kimeldorf, Howard. Reds or Rackets? The Making of Radical and 
Conservative Unions on the Waterfront. Berkeley and Los Ange-
les: University of California Press, 1988.
Kirsh, Benjamin S. Automation and Collective Bargaining.  New 
York: Central Book Co., 1964.
Kornhauser, Arthur, Robert Dublin, and Arthur M. Ross, eds. Indus-
trial Conflict. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1954.
Kreps, Juanita M. Automation and Employment. New York: Holt, 
Reinhart & Winston, 1964.
Larrowe, Charles P. Harry Bridges: The Rise and Fall of Radical 
Labor in the United States. New York: Lawrence Hill, 1972.
——— . Shape Up and Hiring Hall. Berkeley and Los Angeles: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1955.
Larson, John L. Internal Improvement. Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 2001.
Bibliography • 479
Latimer, Jack. Friendship among Equals. Geneva: International Stan-
dards Organisation, 1997.
Lockwood, Rupert. Ship to Shore: A History of Melbourne’s Water-
front and Its Union Struggles. Sydney: Hale & Iremonger, 1990.
Magden, Ronald E. The Working Longshoreman. Tacoma: Interna-
tional Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union Local 23, 
1996.
Magden, Ronald E., and A. D. Martinson. The Working Waterfront: 
The Story of Tacoma’s Ships and Men. Tacoma: International 
Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union Local 23 and Port of 
Tacoma, 1982.
Maldonado, A. W. Teodoro Moscoso and Puerto Rico’s Operation 
Bootstrap. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1997.
Marolda, Edward J., and Oscar P. Fitzgerald. The United States 
Navy and the Vietnam Conflict. Vol. 2, From Military Assistance 
to Combat, 1959–1965. Washington, DC: Naval Historical Cen-
ter, 1986.
McDougall, Ian. Voices of Leith Dockers. Edinburgh: Mercat Press, 
2001.
McNickle, Chris. To Be Mayor of New York: Ethnic Politics in the 
City. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.
Minor, Woodruff. Pacific Gateway: An Illustrated History of the Port 
of Oakland. Oakland: Port of Oakland, 2000.
Mokyr, Joel. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowl-
edge Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Mollenkopf, John, and Manuel Castells, eds. Dual City: Restructur-
ing New York. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1992.
Moses, Robert. Public Works: A Dangerous Trade. New York: 
McGraw- Hill, 1970.
Nelson, Bruce. Divided We Stand: American Workers and the Strug-
gle for Black Equality. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
2001.
——— . Workers on the Waterfront: Seamen, Longshoremen, and 
Unionism in the 1930s. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 
1990.
Niven, John. American President Lines and Its Forebears, 1848–
1984. Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1987.
North Carolina: A Guide to the Old North State. Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 1939.
O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. Globalization and 
480 • Bibliography
History: The Evolution of a Nineteenth- Century Atlantic Econ -
omy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Pacini, Alfred, and Dominique Pons. Docker à Marseille. Paris: Payot 
& Rivages, 1996.
Pearson, Roy, and John Fossey. World Deep- Sea Container Shipping: 
A Geographical, Economic, and Statistical Analysis. Liverpool: 
Marine Transport Centre, University of Liverpool, 1983.
Pelzman, Sam, and Clifford Winston, eds. Deregulation of Network 
Industries: What’s Next? Washington, DC: AEI- Brookings Joint 
Center for Regulatory Studies, 2000.
Pilcher, William W. The Portland Longshoremen: A Dispersed Urban 
Community. New York: Norton, 1972.
Pinder, David, and Brian Slack, eds. Shipping and Ports in the 
Twenty- first Century: Globalisation, Technological Change, and 
the Environment. London: Routledge, 2004.
Pollak, Richard. The Colombo Bay. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2004.
Rath, Eric. Container Systems. New York, Wiley, 1973.
Ricardo, David. The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. 
London, 1821. Reprint, New York, 1965.
Rodrigue, Jean- Paul, Claude Comtois, and Brian Slack. The Geogra-
phy of Transport Systems, 2nd ed. Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 
2009.
Rosenberg, Daniel. New Orleans Dockworkers: Race, Labor, and 
Unionism, 1892–1923. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1988.
Rostow, W. W. Stages of Economic Growth. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1960.
Rubin, Lester. The Negro in the Longshore Industry. Philadelphia: 
Wharton School, 1974.
Ruppenthal, Karl M., ed. Revolution in Transportation. Stanford: 
Stanford University Graduate School of Business, 1960.
Sayre, Wallace S., and Herbert Kaufman. Governing New York City: 
Politics in the Metropolis. New York: Norton, 1960.
Schenker, Eric, and Harry C. Brockel, eds. Port Planning and Devel-
opment as Related to Problems of U.S. Ports and the U.S. Coastal 
Environment. Cambridge, MD: Maritime Press of America, 1974.
Schwartz, Stephen. Brotherhood of the Sea: A History of the Sailors’ 
Union of the Pacific, 1885–1985. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction 
Books, 1986.
Bibliography • 481
Seligman, Ben B. Most Notorious Victory: Man in an Age of Auto-
mation. New York: Free Press, 1966.
Selvin, David F. A Terrible Anger. Detroit: Wayne State University 
Press, 1996.
Sharpsteen, Bill. The Docks. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2011.
Sheffi, Yossi. Logistics Clusters: Delivering Value and Driving 
Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Shields, Jerry. The Invisible Billionaire: Daniel Ludwig.  Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1986.
Simey, T. S., ed., The Dock Worker: An Analysis of Conditions of 
Employment in the Port of Manchester. Liverpool: Liverpool Uni-
versity Press, 1956.
Sletmo, Gunnar K., and Ernest W. Williams Jr. Liner Conferences in 
the Container Age: U.S. Policy at Sea. New York: Macmillan Pub-
lishing, 1981.
Snyder- Grenier, Ellen M. Brooklyn! An Illustrated History. Philadel-
phia: Temple University Press, 1996.
Starr, Roger. The Rise and Fall of New York City. New York: Basic 
Books, 1985.
Tursi, Frank V., Susan E. White, and Steve McQuilkin. Lost Empire: 
The Fall of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. Winston- Salem: 
Winston- Salem Journal, 2000.
Vernon, Raymond. Metropolis 1985: An Interpretation of the Find-
ings of the New York Metropolitan Region Study. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1960.
Whittaker, J. R. Containerization. Washington, DC: Hemisphere 
Publishing, 1975.
Williams, Ernest W. The Regulation of Rail- Motor Rate Competi -
tion. New York: Harper, 1958.
Wilson, David F. Dockers: The Impact of Industrial Change. Lon -
don: Fontana, 1972.
Wilson, Rosalyn A. Transportation in America. Washington, DC: 
Eno Transportation Foundation, 2002.
Winston, Clifford, Thomas M. Corsi, Curtis M. Grimm, and Carol 
A. Evans. The Economic Effects of Surface Freight Deregulation. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1990.
Worden, William L. Cargoes: Matson’s First Century in the Pacific. 
Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1981.
Zweig, Phillip L. Wriston: Walter Wriston, Citibank, and the Rise 
482 • Bibliography
and Fall of American Financial Supremacy. New York: Crown 
Publishers, 1995.
Articles and Working Papers
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. “Trade Costs.” Journal 
of Economic Literature 42 (September 2004): 691–751.
Baer, Werner. “Puerto Rico: An Evaluation of a Successful Develop-
ment Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 73, no. 4 (1959).
Beier, Frederick J., and Stephen W. Frick. “The Limits of Piggyback: 
Light at the End of the Tunnel.” Transportation Journal 18, no. 2 
(1978).
Bernhofen, Daniel M., Zouheir El- Sahli, and Richard Kneller. “Esti-
mating the Effects of the Container Revolution on World Trade.” 
CESifo Working Paper 4136, February 2013.
Bougheas, Spiros, Panicos O. Demetriades, and Edgar L. W. Morgen-
roth. “Infrastructure, Transport Costs, and Trade.” Journal of In-
ternational Economics 47 (1999).
Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. “Globalization and the 
Gains from Variety.” Working Paper 10314, NBER, February 
2004.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt. “Beyond Computation: Infor-
mation Technology, Organizational Transformation, and Business 
Performance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, no. 4 (2000).
Carrere, Céline, and Maurice Schiff. “On the Geography of Trade: 
Distance Is Alive and Well.” World Bank Policy Research Working 
Paper 3206, February 2004.
Carruthers, Robin, and Jitendra N. Bajpai. “Trends in Trade and Lo-
gistics: An East Asian Perspective.” Working Paper No. 2, Trans-
port Sector Unit, World Bank, 2002.
Chen, Hong, Murray Z. Brank, and Owen Q. Wu. “U.S. Retail and 
Wholesale Inventory Performance from 1981 to 2003.” Working 
Paper, University of British Columbia, 2005.
Clark, Ximena, David Dollar, and Alejandro Micco, “Port Efficiency, 
Maritime Transport Costs, and Bilateral Trade.” Journal of Devel-
opment Economics 74, no. 3 (2004): 417–450.
Coe, David, et al. “The Missing Globalization Puzzle.” International 
Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/02/171, October 2002.
Connolly, D. J. “Social Repercussions of New Cargo Handling Meth-
Bibliography • 483
ods in the Port of London.” International Labour Review 105 
(1972): 543–568.
Cushing, Charles R. “The Development of Cargo Ships in the United 
States and Canada in the Last Fifty Years.” Manuscript, January 8, 
1992.
David, Paul A. “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Per-
spective on the Modern Productivity Paradox.” American Eco-
nomic Review 80 (1990): 355–361.
Davies, J. E. “An Analysis of Cost and Supply Conditions in the Liner 
Shipping Industry.” Journal of Industrial Economics 31 (1983): 
417–436.
Dempsey, Paul Stephen. “The Law of Intermodal Transportation: 
What It Was, What It Is, What It Should Be.” Transportation Law 
Journal 27, no. 3 (2000).
Devine, Warren D., Jr. “From Shafts to Wires: Historical Perspective 
on Electrification.” Journal of Economic History 43 (1983): 
347–372.
Egedyi, Tineke M. “The Standardized Container: Gateway Technolo-
gies in Cargo Transportation.” Working Paper, Delft University of 
Technology, 2000.
Farrell, Joseph, and Garth Saloner. “Installed Base and Compatibil-
ity: Innovation, Product Preannouncements, and Predation.” 
American Economic Review 76, no. 5 (1986): 940–955.
Feenstra, Robert. “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Pro -
duction in the Global Economy.” Journal of Economic Perspec -
tives. 12, no. 4 (1998).
Fishlow, Albert. “Antebellum Regional Trade Reconsidered.” Ameri-
can Economic Review (1965 supplement).
Fujita, Masahisa, and Tomoya Mori. “The Role of Ports in the Mak-
ing of Major Cities: Self- Agglomeration and Hub- Effect.” Journal 
of Development Economics 49 (1996).
Gilman, Roger H. “The Port, a Focal Point.” Transactions of the 
American Society of Civil Engineers, 1958.
Glaeser, Edward L. “Reinventing Boston: 1640–2003.” Working 
Paper No. 10166, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Janet E. Kohlhase. “Cities, Regions, and the 
Decline of Transport Costs.” Working Paper No. 9886, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.
Godfrey, Brian J. “Restructuring and Decentralization in a World 
484 • Bibliography
City.” Geographical Review, Thematic Issue: American Urban Ge-
ography 85 (1995).
Hall, John, and D. Caradog Jones. “Social Grading of Occupations.” 
British Journal of Sociology 1 (1950): 31–55.
Harbeson, Robert W. “Recent Trends in the Regulation of Intermo-
dal Rate Competition in Transportation.” Land Economics 42, no. 
3 (1966).
Harlander, L. A. “Container System Design Developments over Two 
Decades.” Marine Technology 19 (1982): 364–376.
——— . “Engineering Development of a Container System for the 
West Coast–Hawaiian Trade.” Transactions of the Society of 
Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 68 (1960).
——— . “Further Development of a Container System for the West 
Coast–Hawaiian Trade.” Transactions of the Society of Naval Ar-
chitects and Marine Engineers 69 (1961).
——— . “The Role of the 24- Foot Container in Intermodal Transpor-
tation.” Paper for American Standards Association MH- 5 Sec -
tional Committee, June 1966.
Helle, Horst Jürgen. “Der Hafenarbeiter zwischen Segelschiff und 
Vollbeschäftigung.” Economisch en Sociaal Tijdschrift 19, no. 4 
(1965).
Hoare, Anthony. “British Ports and Their Export Hinterlands: A 
Rapidly Changing Geography.” Geografiska Annaler, Series B. 
Human Geography 68, no. 1 (1986).
Hopper, A. G., P. H. Judd, and G. Williams. “Cargo Handling and Its 
Effect on Dry Cargo Ship Design.” Quarterly Transactions of the 
Royal Institution of Naval Architects 106, no. 2 (1964).
Hummels, David. “Have International Transportation Costs De -
clined?” Working Paper, University of Chicago Graduate School 
of Business, 1999.
——— . “Time as a Trade Barrier.” Mimeo, Purdue University, 2001.
——— . “Towards a Geography of Trade Costs.” Mimeo, University 
of Chicago, 1999.
——— . “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second 
Era of Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, no. 3 
(2007): 131–154.
Isard, Caroline, and Walter Isard. “Economic Implications of Air -
craft.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 59 (1945): 145–169.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kevin J. Stiroh. “Information Technology 
Bibliography • 485
and Growth.” American Economic Review  89, no. 2 (1999): 
109–115.
Katz, Michael L., and Carl Shapiro. “Systems Competition and Net-
work Effects.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, no. 2 (1994): 
93–115.
Kelley, Robin D. G. “ ‘We Are Not What We Seem’: Rethinking Black 
Working- Class Opposition in the Jim Crow South.” Journal of 
American History 80, no. 1 (1993).
Kerr, Clark, and Lloyd Fisher. “Conflict on the Waterfront.” Atlantic 
184, no. 3 (1949).
King, Robert C., George M. Adams, and G. Lloyd Wilson, “The 
Freight Container as a Contribution to Efficiency in Transporta-
tion.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sci-
ence 187 (1936): 27–36.
Konishi, Hideo. “Formation of Hub Cities: Transportation Cost Ad-
vantage and Population Agglomeration.” Journal of Urban Eco -
nomics 48 (2000).
Kovarsky, Irving. “State Piggyback Statutes and Federalism.” Indus-
trial and Labor Relations Review 18, no. 1 (1964).
Krausse, Gerald H. “The Urban Coast in Singapore: Uses and Man-
agement.” Asian Journal of Public Administration 5, no. 1 (June 
1983): 33–67.
Krugman, Paul. “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences.” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1995, no. 1 (1995): 
327–377.
——— . “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography.” Journal of 
Political Economy 99, no. 3 (1991): 483–499.
Krugman, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. “Globalization and the In-
equality of Nations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, no. 4 
(1995): 857–880.
Kuby, Michael, and Neil Reid, “Technological Change and the Con-
centration of the U.S. General Cargo Port System: 1970–88.” Eco-
nomic Geography 68, no. 3 (1993).
Kujovich, Mary Yeager. “The Refrigerator Car and the Growth of 
the American Dressed Beef Industry.” Business History Review 44 
(1970): 460–482.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R., Daniel M. G. Raff, and Peter Temin. “Be -
yond Markets and Hierarchies: Toward a New Synthesis of Amer-
ican Business History.” American Historical Review 108 (2003).
486 • Bibliography
Larson, Paul D., and H. Barry Spraggins. “The American Railroad 
Industry: Twenty Years after Staggers.” Transportation Quarterly 
52, no. 2 (2000): 5–9.
Levinson, Marc. “Container Shipping and the Decline of New York, 
1955–1975.” Business History Review 80 (2006): 49–80.
——— . “Freight Pain: The Rise and Fall of Globalization.” Foreign 
Affairs 87, no. 6 (2008): 133–140.
——— . “Two Cheers for Discrimination: Deregulation and Effi -
ciency in the Reform of U.S. Freight Transportation, 1976–1998.” 
Enterprise and Society 10 (2008): 178–215.
Lieb, Robert C., and Robert A. Miller. “JIT and Corporate Transpor-
tation Requirements.” Transportation Journal 27, no. 3 (1988): 
5–10.
Liebowitz, S. J., and Stephen E. Margolis. “Network Externality: An 
Uncommon Tragedy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, no. 2 
(1994): 133–150.
Limão, Nuno, and Anthony J. Venables. “Infrastructure, Geographi-
cal Disadvantage and Transport Costs.” World Bank Economic 
Review 15, no. 3 (2001): 451–479.
Linge, G.J.R. “Just- in- Time: More or Less Flexible?” Economic Ge-
ography 67, no. 4 (1991): 316–332.
MacMillan, Douglas C., and T. B. Westfall. “Competitive General 
Cargo Ships.” Transactions of the Society of Naval Architects and 
Marine Engineers 68 (1960).
Manning, Seaton Wesley. “Negro Trade Unionists in Boston.” Social 
Forces 17, no. 2 (1938).
Marin, Pedro L., and Richard Sicotte. “Exclusive Contracts and 
Market Power: Evidence from Ocean Shipping.” Discussion Paper 
2028, Centre for Economic Policy Research, June 2001.
Martin, Will, and Vlad Manole. “China’s Emergence as the Work -
shop of the World.” Working Paper, World Bank, 2003.
McCarney, Bernard J. “Oligopoly Theory and Intermodal Transport 
Price Competition: Some Empirical Findings.” Land Economics  
46, no. 4 (1970).
McDonald, Lucille. “Alaska Steam: A Pictorial History of the Alaska 
Steamship Company.” Alaska Geographic 11, no. 4 (1984).
McLean, Malcolm P. “Opportunity Begins at Home.” American 
Magazine 149 (May 1950).
Miller, Raymond Charles. “The Dockworker Subculture and Some 
Bibliography • 487
Problems in Cross- Cultural and Cross- Time Generalizations.” 
Comparative Studies in Society and History 11, no. 3 (1969).
Mills, Edwin S., and Luan Sendé. “Inner Cities.” Journal of Economic 
Literature 35 (1997).
Mills, Herb. “The San Francisco Waterfront—Labor/Management 
Relations: On the Ships and Docks. Part One: ‘The Good Old 
Days.’ ” Berkeley: University of California Institute for the Study 
of Social Change, 1978.
——— . “The San Francisco Waterfront—Labor/Management Rela-
tions: On the Ships and Docks. Part Two: Modern Longshore Op-
erations.” Berkeley: University of California Institute for the Study 
of Social Change, 1978.
Mokyr, Joel. “Technological Inertia in Economic History.” Journal of 
Economic History 52 (1992): 325–338.
Morton, Alexander Lyall. “Intermodal Competition for the Intercity 
Transport of Manufactures.” Land Economics 48, no. 4 (1972).
Nelson, James C. “The Economic Effects of Transport Deregulation 
in Australia.” Transportation Journal 16, no. 2 (1976): 48–71.
North, Douglass. “Ocean Freight Rates and Economic Development 
1750–1913.” Journal of Economic History 18 (1958): 537–555.
Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel. “The Resurgence of Growth 
in the Late 1990s: Is Information Technology the Story?” Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 14, no. 4 (2000): 3–22.
O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. “When Did Global-
ization Begin?” Working Paper 7632, National Bureau of Eco -
nomic Research, 2000.
Overman, Henry G., and L. Alan Winters. “The Geography of UK 
International Trade.” Working Paper CEPDP0606, Centre for 
Economic Performance, London, January 2004.
Pauling, Norman G. “Some Neglected Areas of Research on the Ef-
fects of Automation and Technological Change on Workers.” Jour-
nal of Business 37, no. 3 (1964): 261–273.
Puffert, Douglas J. “Path Dependence in Spatial Networks: The Stan-
dardization of Railway Track Gauge.” Explorations in Economic 
History 39 (2002): 282–314.
——— . “The Standardization of Track Gauge on North American 
Railways, 183 0–1890.” Journal of Economic History 60, no. 4 
(2000): 933–960.
Ripley, William Z. “A Peculiar Eight Hour Problem.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 33, no. 3 (1919).
488 • Bibliography
Romer, Paul M. “Why, Indeed, in America? Theory, History, and the 
Origins of Modern Economic Growth.” Working Paper 5443, 
NBER, January 1996.
Rosenberg, Nathan. “On Technological Expectations.” Economic 
Journal 86, no. 343 (1976): 523–535.
Ross, Philip. “Waterfront Labor Response to Technological Change: 
A Tale of Two Unions.” Labor Law Journal 21, no. 7 (1970).
Rua, Gisela. “Diffusion of Containerization.” Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors Working Paper, October 2014.
Rubin, Marilyn, Ilene Wagner, and Pearl Kamer. “Industrial Migra-
tion: A Case Study of Destination by City- Suburban Origin within 
the New York Metropolitan Area.” Journal of the American Real 
Estate and Urban Economics Association 6 (1978).
Ryon, Roderick N. “An Ambiguous Legacy: Baltimore Blacks and 
the CIO, 1936–1941.” Journal of Negro History 65, no. 1 (1980).
Sasuly, Richard. “Why They Stick to the ILA.” Monthly Review (Jan-
uary 1956).
Sjostrom, William. “Ocean Shipping Cartels: A Survey.” Review of 
Network Economics 3, no. 2 (2004).
Slack, Brian. “Pawns in the Game: Ports in a Global Transportation 
System.” Growth and Change 24, no. 4 (1993).
Slesinger, Reuben E. “The Pace of Automation: An American View.” 
Journal of Industrial Economics 6, no. 3 (1958): 241–261.
Solow, Robert. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production 
Function.” Review of Economics and Statistics 39, no. 2 (1957): 
65–94.
Stocker, H. E. “Cargo Handling and Stowage.” Society of Naval Ar-
chitects and Marine Engineers, November 1933.
Summers, Clyde W. “Admission Policies of Labor Unions.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 61, no. 1 (1946).
Sung, Nai- Ching, and Michael C. Bunamo. “Competition for Han-
dling U.S. Foreign Trade Cargoes: The Port of New York’s Experi-
ence.” Economic Geography 49, no. 2 (1973): 156–162.
Taft, Philip. “The Responses of the Bakers, Longshoremen and Team-
sters to Public Exposure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 74, no. 
3 (1960).
Todd, Daniel. “The Interplay of Trade, Regional and Technical Fac-
tors in the Evolution of a Port System: The Case of Taiwan.” Geo-
grafiska Annaler, Series B. Human Geography 75, no. 1 (1993).
Tozzoli, Anthony J. “Containerization and Its Impact on Port Devel-
Bibliography • 489
opment.” Journal of the Waterways, Harbors and Coastal Engi -
neering Division, Proceedings of the American Society of Civil 
Engineers 98, no. WW3 (1972).
Turnbull, Peter. “Contesting Globalization on the Waterfront.” Poli-
tics and Society 28, no. 3 (2000).
“Uniform Containerization of Freight: Early Steps in the Evolution 
of an Idea.” Business History Review 43, no. 1 (1969): 84–87.
Vamplew, Wray. “Railways and the Transformation of the Scottish 
Economy.” Economic History Review 24 (1971).
Wallace, Michael, and Arne L. Kalleberg. “Industrial Transformation 
and the Decline of Craft: The Decomposition of Skill in the Print-
ing Industry, 1931–1978.” American Sociological Review 47, no. 
3 (1982): 307–324.
Waters, Robert C. “The Military Sealift Command versus the U.S. 
Flag Liner Operators.” Transport Journal 28, no. 4 (1989): 
28–34.
Weldon, Foster L. “Cargo Containerization in the West Coast–Ha-
waiian Trade.” Operations Research 6 (September–October 1958).

Index
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 
382
AFL- CIO, 140, 146, 166–67
Africa, 321, 362, 371
African Americans, 33, 137, 159, 
163, 420–21n2
Airline Navigators’ Association,  
167
airplanes, 16, 19, 121, 128, 199, 
362–63
airports, 111, 112, 113, 378, 381
Alabama State Docks, 73
Alameda, California, 87–88, 260
Alaska, 41, 256, 264
Alaska Barge and Transport Co., 
237
Alaska Freight Lines, 100, 217, 
405n25
Alaska Steamship Company, 41, 
190, 262, 405–6n25
Albert Canal, 379
aluminum, 1, 41, 64, 66, 86, 90, 
181, 184
Aluminum Company of America, 
181
American Bureau of Shipping, 66, 
67
American Civil War, 15
American Export Isbrandtsen Line, 
303
American Export Lines, 226
American Federation of Labor 
(AFL), 109. See also AFL- CIO
American Federation of Longshore-
men, 109
American Federation of Musicians, 
167
American Foundation on Automa-
tion and Employment, 166
American- Hawaiian Steamship 
Company, 178–79, 218, 260
American Independence Line, 313
American Independent Oil Com-
pany, 291–92
American Lancer, 287–88, 290, 291
American Magazine, 49
American President Lines, 90, 190, 
265, 319, 325, 352, 354
American Standards Association 
(ASA), 176, 180–82, 183–84, 
214; MH- 5 committee, 176–78, 
180, 181–83, 184, 186, 188, 190, 
191, 195–97; Standards Review 
Board, 181, 191
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 173, 
399n12
Anahuac, 218
Anastasia, Anthony, 140, 158, 161
Antwerp, Belgium, 278, 286, 333; 
and barge services, 379; and con-
tainerport development, 279; 
economy of, 375–76; land 
around, 376, 377; and logistics 
centers, 379–80; longshoremen in, 
34; and port expansion, 362
Arab- Israeli War (1967), 307
492 • Index
Arthur D. Little, 273
Asia, 353; and breakbulk shipping, 
279; and containerport develop-
ment, 279–80; container service 
to, 223; containerships for, 288; 
and European routes, 365; and 
Los Angeles, 361; and Matson, 
252; and New York route, 347; 
and North American Routes, 347, 
353, 361; Pacific Rim, 279; and 
Panama Canal, 371; ports in, 
384; and United States, 346
Asian Development Bank, 318
Associated Steamships, 448n4
Atlantic Container Line, 306
Atlantic States Motor Lines, 53
Auckland, New Zealand, 340
Australia, 296, 303, 334, 368; and 
containerization, 295; and con-
tainerport development, 280; 
dock operators in, 35–36; early 
containers in, 40; and East Coast, 
321; and Europe, 294, 332, 343; 
exports of to U.S., 299; and Great 
Britain, 280; and Japan, 292, 294; 
Maritime Services Board, 280; 
Meat Board, 343; and North 
America, 294; railroads in, 348; 
shippers in, 343; Stevedoring 
Board, 29–30; trucking regulation 
in, 348
automakers, 167
automation: and British shipping, 
271; and guided vehicles, 373; 
and ILA, 137, 138–42; and 
ILWU, 143, 145, 146; and long-
shoremen, 135–36, 383; and 
Matson Navigation Company, 80, 
82
automobiles, 16, 292
Ballantine Beer, 63
Baltimore, Maryland, 12, 225, 319, 
363; and containerport develop-
ment, 267; and foreign- trade, 
257; ILA strikes in, 165; and land 
freight rates, 109; location of, 
317; and piggyback services, 210; 
and race and ethnicity, 33; and 
Sea- Land, 96, 221
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, 228
Barbie dolls, 355, 356, 360
Barnett, Vincent, 141
Basel, Switzerland, 221, 225
Baxter, George, 28
Bay Area Rapid Transit District, 
262
Belgium, 42, 288
Bell, Peter, 169
Ben Line, 303
Bernhofen, Daniel M., 354
Besson, Frank, 238–39, 241, 246, 
247
Betamax video players, 16
Bethlehem Steel, 66
Bienville, 243
Bingham, Jonathan, 116–17
Bonner, Herbert, 76
Borruey, René, 70
Boston, Massachusetts: and contain-
erport development, 267, 270; 
and ILA, 159–60; longshoremen 
in, 33; and Massachusetts Port 
Authority, 267; and Sea- Land, 
267; and shipping costs, 340; and 
trucking vs. containerships, 267
Bowers, John, 163
Bradley, William, 136, 146, 158, 
163
Brando, Marlon, 7
Braudel, Fernand, 375
breakbulk cargo, 123, 215, 363; 
and Brooklyn, 127; and Matson 
Navigation Company, 82; and 
shippers, 342
breakbulk shipping, 297; and con-
ference rates, 300–301; quantity 
of, 286n; and shipping costs, 338, 
Index • 493
339; and Vietnam War logistical 
supply, 240
breakbulk ships, 221, 223, 224, 
225, 237, 285, 296, 332; cargo 
capacity of, 333; and cargo 
handling, 25; and container 
cranes, 287; cost of operating, 
331; and economies of scale, 
312–13; and Europe– South Af-
rica route, 321; and fuel con-
sumption, 334; and overcapac-
ity problem, 298, 299; and 
shipping costs, 331, 334, 337; 
and shipping time, 362
Bremen, Germany, 225, 272, 279, 
286, 371
Bremerhaven, Germany, 44, 221
Bridges, Harry, 135–36, 144, 145, 
146, 147, 148–49, 150, 151, 152, 
153, 154–55, 156, 157, 158, 161, 
383
Bristol- Myers, 91
British Columbia, Canada, 381
Brooklyn, New York, 107, 119, 
129; and breakbulk cargo, 127; 
to Bremerhaven route, 44; and 
Bull Line, 130; container termi-
nals for, 125; docks of, 103; econ-
omy of, 130–31, 134; employ-
ment in, 129, 130, 131, 134; 
factories in, 133–34; and general 
cargo, 126; and ILA, 158, 159–
60, 161; international traffic of, 
124; loss of tonnage in, 128; wa-
terfront of, 105, 114; and Water-
man, 113
Brooklyn Army Terminal, 129
Brooklyn Navy Yard, 126, 133
Brown, Leo, 124, 126
Brown Industries, 64–66
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 17
Bull Line, 90–91, 95–96, 124, 129–
30, 302; bankruptcy of, 96; and 
container dimensions, 178; and 
McLean, 98, 410n31; and Puerto 
Rico, 178
Busan, Korea, 2, 365, 376
Bush Docks, 129
C- 2 ships, 43, 72–76, 83
C- 3 ships, 82–83, 87, 88, 252
C- 4 ships, 245
Cagney, James, 110
California, 257; Central Valley of 
and intracoastal route, 94; and 
containerport development, 256, 
258; fruit and vegetables from, 
260; and Japan, 292; and Matson 
Navigation Company, 79
Camas, Washington, 254
Campbell, Robert, 75, 80, 239
Cam Ranh Bay, 234–35, 239, 240, 
242, 243, 245, 248, 249, 286
Canada, 158, 214, 305
cargo handling, xiv, 215, 217, 222, 
271, 280, 298, 377, 446; automa-
tion of, 5–9, 146; and breakbulk 
vessels, 25; before containers, 22–
27; and containership efficiencies, 
222; costs of, 17, 38, 42–43, 47, 
62, 70, 104, 330, 363, 397n6; 
and early containers, 38, 39–40, 
42–43; and Elizabeth, 122, 125; 
and ILA, 161; and ILWU, 145, 
151, 153, 155–56; irregular work 
in pre- container, 28; and just- in- 
time manufacturing, 359; for Lib-
erty and Victory ships, 26; and 
Matson, 79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 88–
89, 146, 195, 197; and McLean, 
100; and New York, 38, 103–4, 
118, 123, 127, 129, 131, 133; 
and politics, 90; and post- war 
trucking, 47; and Sea- Land, 99; 
and shipping costs, 13; and termi-
nals as choke point, 43–46; time 
for, 6, 11, 13–14, 215, 340–41; 
and Vietnam War, 231–33, 234, 
494 • Index
cargo handling (cont.)
237–38, 242, 243. See also cranes; 
longshoremen; shipping costs
Caribbean, 124, 268, 378
Caterpillar Tractor, 226
Central America, 91, 170
Central of Georgia Railroad, 41
Chang Yung- fain, 323, 324
Charleston, South Carolina, 269, 
317, 365
Chas. Bruning Co., 224–25
Chase National Bank, 119
chassis, 90, 98, 121, 123, 204, 220, 
221, 240, 297, 298, 333; for 
crane placement, 7, 8, 76, 84, 85, 
89; and McLean, 63, 64; and 
standardization, 178, 185, 186, 
198; and Tantlinger, 74; and Viet-
nam War, 242, 243
Chelsea Piers, 130
chemicals, 256, 351
Chicago, Illinois, 9, 12, 15, 39, 40, 
208, 210, 228, 257, 339
China, 25, 257, 356, 362, 363, 364, 
366, 368, 371
China Ocean Shipping Company, 
368
Chinitz, Benjamin, 386
Chittagong, Bangladesh, 365
Cho, Ting- Li, 263
Chopin, Alexander, 140
Cincinnati Motor Terminals Com-
pany, 38
Citibank, 55
City Investing, 289
Coastwise Steamship Company, 254
Colombo, Sri Lanka, 365–66
Colon, Panama: Manzanillo Inter-
national Terminal, 374, 378–79
colonialism, 19
Communism, 109, 144, 145–46
computers, 7, 8, 14, 333; as displac-
ing cargo checkers, 373–74; and 
Sea- Land, 99, 244; shipper use of, 
344; simulations with, 87; spread 
of, 19; and Weldon, 82, 87
Conex boxes, 41, 170, 234, 238, 
239–40, 244, 246
conferences (cartels), 220, 345; and 
container rates, 215–16, 220, 
224, 275, 291, 299–302; and con-
tainer shipping, 342–44, 346; ero-
sion of power of, 347; and freight 
rates, 48, 203, 304, 305–6, 307, 
331–32, 335, 337, 347; and inter-
national rate- making, 77; and 
rates, 342; and Shipping Act of 
1984, 353
conglomerates, 219, 289, 290
Congress, 145, 146, 197–99, 211–
12, 348, 349; Joint Economic 
Committee, 11
Congress of Industrial Organiza-
tions, 145–46. See also AFL- CIO
Connecticut, 133
Consolidated Freightways, 181
Container Marine Lines, 275
containers, 72–74, 90; abandoned, 
387; and cargo theft, 340; cells 
for, 177, 179, 197, 198–99, 215, 
219, 287, 296, 330–31, 333, 
448n4; changing reputation of, 
89–90, 170, 202, 203; deck, 82–
83, 88, 89; design of, 1–2, 10, 82–
87, 170–71; dimensions/size of, 
82, 85, 170–85, 193–99, 200, 
216, 312, 344, 383–84, 388; di-
versity of, 170–72, 174–75, 200; 
early, xii, 38–43; economics of, 1, 
202, 329–30, 361; empty, 43, 81, 
94, 175, 215, 227, 249, 250, 253, 
280, 333, 351, 352, 364; end 
walls of, 199, 200; first modern, 
64; lifting of, 185–91, 200, 216; 
and Matson, 79–89; and New 
York port, 125–30; and Pan- 
Atlantic, 85; and paperwork, 
215–16; and Port of New York 
Index • 495
Authority, 125–26, 127; refriger-
ated, 8, 74, 88, 243, 332; security 
of, xiv–xv, 9–10, 387–88, 392–
93n5; and smuggling, xv, 9–10, 
387–88; standardization of, 170–
201, 203, 214, 216; time needed 
for embrace of, 17; and transpor-
tation deregulation, 349; unantic-
ipated consequences of, xiii–xvi, 
157; and unions, 136; and world 
economy, 329–30. See also twist 
lock
container shipping: as American af-
fair, 270; economics of, 268–70, 
297–309, 346, 383–87; and econ-
omy, 272–73; as international 
business, 125; McLean’s develop-
ment of first, 64–67; as niche 
business, 216; overcapacity in, 
305; and piggyback freight, 214; 
worldwide capacity of, 306, 313, 
325
containerships: breakneck construc-
tion of new, 296; C- 2 freighters as 
pure, 72–76; capacity of, 88, 94, 
290–91, 296, 313, 314, 315, 316, 
323, 333; construction of new, 
223–24; cost of, 288, 312, 314, 
316, 324, 331; crew- size of, 314; 
destabilization of, 7, 67; develop-
ment of, 217–25; dimensions/size 
of, 297, 302, 312, 313–15, 324, 
333, 369–72, 383–84, 388–89; 
and economies of scale, 312–13, 
324; efficiencies of, 221–22; and 
excess capacity, 298–99, 301, 
303, 369, 384; and feeder ships, 
325; first- generation, 286–87, 
332; fuel consumption by, 307, 
314, 324, 338; G- class, 323, 324; 
government subsidies and mili-
tary shipments for, 289; large size, 
369–72, 381; and oil crisis, 334–
35; second- generation, 287–89, 
332–33; SL- 7s, 290–91, 324, 384; 
speed of, 291, 295–96, 297, 302, 
307–8, 314, 323, 324, 333, 334, 
369, 454n7
conveyors, 24, 54, 80
corruption, 29, 30, 104, 109, 124, 
140, 158, 420n2
Cowie, Jefferson, 392n3
cranes, 170, 319; and breakbulk 
ships, 287; and container diver-
sity, 171; and containerport de-
velopment, 256, 279; design of, 
5–6, 10, 67, 74–76, 83–85, 86; 
and early containers, 38; and 
economies of scale, 312; first 
purpose- built for containers, 87; 
and ILA, 161; and Jebel Ali, 381; 
land- based, 84; and lifting stan-
dards, 187; maintenance prob-
lems of, 90; and Matson, 83–85, 
86, 87–88, 89, 151, 260; and Mc-
Lean, 67, 70; and Oakland con-
tainerport development, 262; and 
Pan- Atlantic, 74–76, 84; and port 
investment costs, 320; and port 
size, 316; remote- control, 374; 
and Sea- Land, 90, 243, 248; and 
Seatrain Lines railway boxcars, 
70; and second- generation con-
tainerships, 287; shipboard, 22–
23, 75, 83–84, 90, 177, 203, 242, 
245, 255; stacking, 6–7; and 
swing problem, 84–85; and Tant-
linger, 67, 73, 75; and train load-
ing, 8, 9; and trolley, 83–84, 86; 
unmanned stacking, 373; and 
Vietnam War, 240, 241, 242, 243, 
248. See also spreaders; winches
crews, 5, 11, 48, 66, 77, 171, 298, 
314, 369
Crown Zellerbach Corp., 254
Cullman, Howard, 111, 116–17
Cunard Line, 117, 277–78, 313
Cushing, Charles, 92, 324
496 • Index
Cushing, John E., 79, 80
Czachowski, Bernard, 92
Da Nang, South Vietnam, 231–32, 
234, 239, 243, 245, 249
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, 368
Dell Inc., 358
DeLong piers, 235, 243
Delta Steamship Co., 324
Denmark, 41
Dewey, Thomas E., 110, 111
Dixon, George, 163
dockers. See longshoremen
Downtown–Lower Manhattan As-
sociation, 119
Dravo Corporation, 41
Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 
380–82
Dubai Ports World, 381
Duisburg, Germany, 379
Durban, South Africa, 363
East Africa, 381
East Asia, 294, 343
Eastman Kodak Company, 213
East River, 103, 128
economic geography, 2–3, 17–20, 
363–64, 378, 392n3
economies of scale, 209, 225, 272, 
279, 312–13, 324
Econships, 324, 325, 326, 327, 384
Ecuador, 379
Edge, Walter, 111
Edinburgh, Scotland, 34, 36
Edison, Thomas, 16–17
Egger, Cecil, 65, 66
Eisenberg, Walter, 161
Elizabeth, New Jersey: and con-
tainer ships, 123, 126, 131; devel-
opment of, 114–15, 125, 129, 
255, 266; employment in, 129; 
and international business, 125; 
and McLean, 228, 253; and New 
York City, 123; and Port of New 
York Authority, 98, 115, 122, 
125, 128, 255, 268, 417n31; and 
Sea- Land, 98–99, 123; size of, 
315
Elizabethport, 261
Ellerman Line, 303
El- Sahli, Zouheir, 354
England, 18
English Channel, 317
Erie and St. Lawrence Corporation, 
204
Erie Canal, 15
Europe, 4, 25, 192, 297; and Aus-
tralia, 294, 332, 343; container 
design in, 170, 171, 199–200; and 
container dimensions, 175, 183, 
184–85; and containerport devel-
opment, 279; and container ser-
vices, 125, 220–21, 223, 224–25; 
and containerships, 224, 288; and 
East Asia, 343; economy of, 375–
76; and Far East, 294, 304, 307, 
333; and Flexi- Van, 215; and 
Great Britain, 278; and Great 
Lakes ports, 107–8; industrial 
production in, 305; international 
trade with, 256; and Japan, 321; 
and London, 278; and military 
cargo, 247; and North American 
trade, 299, 321, 347; and Oak-
land, 262, 264; and postwar 
economy, 107; railway standard-
ization in, 173; and Sea- Land, 
217–18, 227–28, 239, 286; and 
Singapore, 283; and South Africa, 
321
European Common Market, 277
European Economic Community, 
278
European Union, 376
Europe–Australia conference, 301
Europe–Pacific consortium, 304
Evergreen Marine, 323, 324, 325–
26, 346–47, 384
Index • 497
Fairland, 272, 313
Far East: and Europe, 294, 304, 
307, 333; and Evergreen, 323; 
and Great Britain, 303; and Mat-
son, 198, 252, 280
Far Eastern Shipping Company, 347
Farrell Line, 299
Felixstowe, England, 2, 226, 277, 
286, 315, 319, 340; and contain-
erport development, 274–76, 279; 
and Hong Kong, 347; and Lon-
don, 275; and Rotterdam, 274, 
275
Felixstowe Railway and Dock Com-
pany, 274
Field, Frank, 160
Field, Fred, 138, 140
financial crisis of 2008–10, 369, 381
Financial Times, 309
First Colony Farms, 310, 327
Fitzgerald, Donald, 70
Flexi- Van, 209–10, 214, 215, 226
Flexivan Leasing, 327
Florida, 204
Ford, Gerald, 348
Forgash, Morris, 179–80, 214–15
forklifts, 24, 27, 104, 170; and con-
tainer dimensions, 175; and con-
tainer standardization, 173; and 
early containers, 39, 43; and 
ILWU, 157; and lifting standards, 
185; and Matson, 86; and pallet-
ized cargo, 136
France, 5, 30, 38, 43, 284, 288, 317, 
325
Fremantle, Australia, 32
French National Railway, 40, 43, 
225
Frost, Dudley, 260
Fruehauf Trailer Company, 65, 
186–87
Galveston, Texas, 165
Gateway City, 76, 83, 202
General Electric, 213
General Motors, 357
Genoa, Italy, 377
Germany, 47, 94, 222, 225, 252, 
277, 302, 336, 375
Glaeser, Edward L., 11
Glasgow, Scotland, 278, 286
Gleason, Thomas (Teddy), 128, 
135–36, 137–38, 140, 142, 159, 
160, 161, 162–63, 164–66, 239, 
383
globalization, 18, 359, 360, 368. See 
also world economy
global supply chains, 3, 14, 355, 
358, 360–61, 365, 376, 379, 382
Goldblatt, Louis, 143, 167–68
Goldman, Jerome L., 90
Grace Line, 37, 90, 121, 265; and 
container standardization, 173; 
and gang sizes, 138, 139; and lift-
ing standards, 186, 188, 190; and 
South America, 384; wooden vans 
of, 41
Grangemouth, Scotland, 222, 272
Great Britain, 38, 315; and Austra-
lia, 280; and automation, 271; 
British Rail, 226; British Trans-
port Docks Board, 272, 273; and 
container dimensions, 184–85; 
and containerport development, 
270–76; and container shipping, 
223, 224; dock strikes in, 35; 
early containers in, 38; and Euro-
pean Economic Community, 278; 
and European trade, 278; and Ev-
ergreen Marine, 325; and Far 
East, 303; and government plan-
ning efforts, 385; and Hong 
Kong, 281; and lifting standards, 
191; National Dock Labour 
Board, 30, 36; Parliament, 277; 
railroads in, 38, 226; and second- 
generation containerships, 288; 
and Singapore, 282, 283; steam-
498 • Index
Great Britain (cont.)
ship companies in, 288; and trade 
with North America, 279
Great Depression, 27, 49
Great Lakes, 107–8, 321
Greenwich Village, 127
Guaranteed Annual Income. See In-
ternational Longshoremen’s Asso-
ciation (ILA)
Gulf of Mexico, 266, 317
Gulfport, Mississippi, 270
Gulick, J. W., 198
Haiphong, North Vietnam, 365
Halberg, Herbert, 127
Hall, Herbert, 181–83, 186, 194, 
196
Hamburg, Germany, 31, 278, 287, 
295, 296, 315, 365, 371
Hampton Roads, 268, 317
Hansen, Wilhelm A. N., 336
Hapag- Lloyd, 224, 302, 303, 304, 
313, 324
Harbor Freeway, 258
Harlander, Don, 83
Harlander, Leslie, 83–86, 187, 191, 
196
Harriman, Averell, 116–17
Hartman, Paul, 156
Hawaii, 79, 80, 252, 256, 257, 259
Hawaiian Citizen, 88–89, 153, 202
Hawaiian Merchant, 87, 202
Healy, James, 162
Heckscher- Ohlin model, 395n14
Hinden, Eugene, 191
Hitt, Lorin M., 17
Hoffer, Eric, 154
Holland- America Line, 117, 118, 
119, 120, 220
Holland Tunnel, 103, 118
Honda Motor Company, 14
Hong Kong, 319, 322, 366; and 
containerization, 294–95; and Fe-
lixstowe, 347; and Great Britain, 
281; industrial complexes in, 3; 
and Los Angeles, 361; and Mat-
son, 294; and port size, 315; and 
Post- Panamax ships, 315; and 
round- the- world service, 321, 
322; and Singapore, 284
Hong Kong Container Committee, 
281
Honolulu, Hawaii, 83, 88, 89, 303
Houston, Texas: chemical plants of, 
91; and containerport develop-
ment, 268; cranes in, 75; and 
Ideal- X, 1; longshoremen in, 158; 
and Newark, 68; and Pan- 
Atlantic, 255; and Sea- Land, 202, 
268
Hoving, Thomas, 127
Hudson River, 102, 105, 121, 130, 
159
Ideal- X, 1, 10, 66–67, 68, 69, 72, 
73, 76, 83, 94, 136, 202, 355, 
382, 384, 387
Impellitteri, Vincent, 115
India, 322
Indian Ocean, 365–66
Indochina, 257
Indonesia, 282, 283, 358, 388
Ingalls Shipyard, 219
insurance, 13, 46, 54, 56, 66, 93, 
106, 179, 225, 293, 296, 339, 
340, 457n21
intermodal shipment, 8, 13, 217, 
246, 251–52
International Container Bureau, 40–
41, 71
International Ladies’ Garment 
Workers Union, 167
International Longshoremen’s and 
Warehousemen’s Union (ILWU), 
135, 142–58; A- men of, 151, 154; 
and A- men vs. B- men, 147–48, 
Index • 499
155; and arbitration, 145, 153; 
and automation, 135, 142–43, 
145, 146, 147, 148, 149–50, 151, 
152–54, 156–66, 167–68; central-
izers vs. decentralizers in, 148–49; 
Coast Labor Committee, 149; 
congressional investigation of, 
145, 146; and Congress of Indus-
trial Organizations, 145–46; and 
contract of 1948, 147; and death 
and disability benefits, 157; four-
 on, four- off practice in, 145; and 
gang sizes, 145, 168; and ILA, 
143–43, 146; and labor produc-
tivity, 155–56; and labor radical-
ism, 146; and lay- offs, 152; and 
Matson, 144–45, 146, 151, 153; 
and Mechanization and Modern-
ization Agreement, 152–58, 166; 
and negotiations of 1956, 148; 
and negotiations of 1958, 150; 
and negotiations of 1959, 151–
52; and negotiations of 1960, 
152; and Pacific Maritime Associ-
ation, 148, 150, 151–52; and pal-
lets, 143, 149, 154, 155; and Pan- 
Atlantic, 146; and pension, 154; 
and race and ethnicity, 33; and re-
tirement, 154, 155, 157; rules of, 
143–44; and ship operators, 144–
45, 148; and “Statement of Prin-
ciples,” 148; and stevedoring 
companies, 143–44, 148; strikes 
of, 143, 144, 146; and wage sup-
plements for displaced longshore-
men, 157; and workday, 150–51; 
and worker compensation, 151–
52, 157; and work rules, 144–45, 
148, 150, 151, 152, 153
International Longshoremen’s Asso-
ciation (ILA), 135, 216, 274; and 
AFL- CIO, 140; and arbitration, 
141, 142, 160; and automation, 
135, 137, 138–42, 158, 160–66; 
and Boston, 267; and Brooklyn, 
128; and containerport develop-
ment, 266–67; and containers, 
136; and displaced longshoremen, 
266; and displaced workers, 165; 
and economic slowdown of 
1960–61, 160; and federal media-
tion, 161–63, 164–65; and gang 
sizes, 136, 137, 138, 139, 158, 
161, 164, 165, 266; and guaran-
teed annual income, 164, 266; 
and Guaranteed Annual Income, 
165, 166; and ILWU, 143, 146; 
and inland sites, 138; internal 
politics of, 136, 140, 158, 159, 
160–61; Local 791, 138; Local 
858, 160; Local 1757, 104; Local 
1814, 158; and Manhattan, 127; 
and Mechanization and Modern-
ization Agreement, 161; and ne-
gotiations of 1956, 137–38; and 
negotiations of 1958–1959, 139–
42; and negotiations of 1960, 
160; and negotiations of 1962–
63, 160–63; and Newark, 137; 
and New York City, 109, 112, 
118–19, 124; and New York 
Shipping Association, 136, 139, 
141, 266; and O’Connor, 116; 
and pallets, 136; and Pan- 
Atlantic, 136, 137, 141; and pen-
sions and early retirement, 164; 
and Philadelphia, 266; and port-
wide seniority system, 160; and 
prepacked cargo, 161; and race 
and ethnicity, 33, 137, 420–21n2; 
and royalty fund, 160, 161; and 
Sea- Land, 126; and strikes, 137–
39, 146, 162, 165; and stripping 
and stuffing, 139, 141; and Team-
sters, 267; and Vietnam War, 239; 
and worker compensation, 160
500 • Index
International Organization for Stan-
dardization (ISO), 183–85, 195, 
200; and container weight, 192–
93; and lifting standards, 188, 
191, 192, 193; Technical Com-
mittee 104 (TC104), 184, 193
International Typographical Union, 
167
Interstate Commerce Act, 69
Interstate Commerce Commission 
(ICC), 39–40, 47, 350; and Mc-
Lean and Waterman, 69; and Mc-
Lean Industries, 59–60; and 
McLean’s truck- ship plan, 57; 
and McLean Trucking, 52–54; 
and New York port, 103; and 
Pan- Atlantic, 68; and piggyback 
services, 206–7, 211–12, 213; and 
Transportation Act of 1958, 211–
12; and transportation deregula-
tion, 348, 349, 351; and trucking, 
51–52
inventories, 14, 214, 293, 341, 357, 
358–59, 460n4
Irish Americans, 33, 159, 163, 
400n18
Irish Sea, 273
Irish Shipping Limited, 313
Israel, 322, 379
Italian Americans, 32, 115–16, 119, 
130, 159
Italy, 3
Jacksonville, Florida, 202, 255
Jamaica, 378
Japan, 4, 214–15, 298, 316, 317, 
358; and Australia, 292, 294; and 
California, 292; and Chicago, 
339; clothing and textile plants 
of, 293; and container dimen-
sions, 184–85; and containeriza-
tion, 250–53; economic develop-
ment strategy of, 293; and 
Europe, 321; government subsi-
dies in, 293–94; industrial pro-
duction in, 305; intermodal trans-
portation in, 251–52; just- in- time 
manufacturing in, 356–57; and 
Matson, 292; and McLean, 250, 
252–53; Ministry of Transport, 
251, 385; National Railway, 251; 
and New York, 293; and North 
America, 325; and Oakland, 251, 
262, 264; seaborne exports of, 
292–93; and Sea- Land, 280, 286, 
322; Shipping and Shipbuilding 
Rationalization Council, 251; 
and Singapore, 283, 284; televi-
sions and stereos produced in, 
253; and United States, 250, 280, 
292, 293; and United States 
Lines, 293
Japanese ship lines, 152–53; and 
containerization, 292–94; and 
containerships, 288; and Los An-
geles, 264; and Oakland, 264; 
and Seattle, 265
Jebel Ali, United Arab Emirates, 
380–82
Johnson, Lyndon B., 164, 165, 231
Joint Logistics Review Board, 246
Jones, Thomas Russell, 119
Jones Act, 77, 171
just- in- time manufacturing. See 
manufacturing
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 315, 319
Katims, Ron, 196, 239
Kaufman, Herbert, 111
Kempton, George, 64, 66
Kempton, Murray, 158
Kennedy, John F., 162, 166
Kheel, Theodore, 162
Khor Fakkan, United Arab Emir-
ates, 382
Killen, James S., 234
King, A. Lyle, 58, 114, 119, 125
Kneller, Richard, 354
Index • 501
Kobe, Japan, 251, 280, 286, 292, 
316
Kohlhase, Janet E., 11
Kooringa, 448n4
Korean War, 107
Korea Shipping Corp., 347
Laird, Melvin, 246
landing ship tanks (LSTs), 41, 231, 
234
Latin America, 223, 321, 378
Le Havre, France, 278, 317, 325, 
365, 377
Lesotho, 363
Levy, Jean, 43
Liberty Ships, 25–26, 27
lift on–lift off ships, 63
lighters: in London, 272; in New 
York Harbor, 23, 103, 117, 118, 
121, 129; in Vietnam, 232
Lincoln Tunnel, 103, 118
Lindsay, John V., 126, 127, 128
Liner Index, 336
Little, Arthur D., 264
Litton Industries, 219, 289, 290
Litton Leasing, 219
Liverpool, England: and container-
port development, 2, 270–71, 
272, 273, 340; longshoremen in, 
28–29, 31, 33; in pre- container 
era, 2, 277–78
Lloyd’s Shipping Economist, 325, 
353
Lodge, Henry Cabot, 235
logistics management, 357–58
London, England, 272, 278–79; and 
containerport development, 270–
76; East India Dock, 275; and Eu-
ropean trade, 278; and Felix-
stowe, 275; and local economic 
benefits, 318; London Docks, 
276; longshoremen in, 30, 31, 
32–33; in precontainer era, 278; 
and Rotterdam, 277; St. Kather-
ine Docks, 275–76; streets of, 
272; Surrey Docks, 276; and Til-
bury, 275; and United States 
Lines, 287
London, Midland, and Scottish 
Railway, 40
Long Beach, California, 145, 259, 
377; abandoned containers in, 
387; containerport development 
of, 261, 264, 265; and double- 
stack container trains, 352; man-
ufacturing in, 257; and Oakland, 
319; and Sea- Land, 264; and 
Vietnam War, 264
Long Beach Freeway, 258
Long Island Railroad, 206
longshoremen, 74, 104, 372, 383; 
accidents and injuries involving, 
24; and automation, 24, 135–36, 
373–74, 383; and breakbulk 
ships, 287; British, 271, 273–74; 
and containerport development, 
266–67; containers’ economic im-
pact on, xiv, 2, 7, 329, 330; and 
containership efficiencies, 222; 
and crime, 36–37, 109–10; and 
early containers, 42–43; hiring of, 
28–31, 32, 110, 420n2; and Lib-
erty and Victory ships, 26; and 
Matson containers, 89; and Mc-
Lean, 77; militancy of, 34–38; 
mores of, 34–35; and New York 
port, 109, 110, 118–19, 128–29; 
productivity of, 46; and race, 33, 
137, 420–21n2; registration of, 
30–31; in Singapore, 282, 283; 
strikes by, 10, 29, 30, 34, 35, 38, 
59, 72, 91, 109, 372; and stuffing 
and unstuffing, 139, 141, 154–55, 
168; traditional work and life of, 
2, 7, 21, 22–24, 26–27, 28–30, 
31–34, 35–36, 168–69; Vietnam-
ese, 242; wages and incomes of, 
27, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36–37, 82, 
502 • Index
longshoremen (cont.)
110, 372, 399n13, 428–29n49, 
456n17. See also International 
Longshoremen’s and Warehouse-
men’s Union (ILWU); Interna-
tional Longshoremen’s Associa-
tion (ILA); Transport and General 
Workers Union
Longshoremen’s Union (Boston), 33
Los Angeles, California, 9; and 
abandoned containers, 387; and 
Asia, 361; before containers, 257; 
and development, 266; and geog-
raphy, 257, 317; and Hong Kong, 
361; ILWU workers in, 33, 145, 
153, 154–55; and Japanese lines, 
264; manufacturing in, 3, 257, 
361; and Matson, 83, 88, 89; and 
port development, 117–18, 258–
59, 261, 264, 265; and Post- 
Panamax ships, 315; productivity 
increases in, 157; racial discrimi-
nation in, 33; and round- the- 
world service, 321; and Sea- Land, 
261; strikes over mechanization 
in, 38; and Tokyo, 361; and Viet-
nam War, 264
Los Angeles Board of Supervisors, 
153
Luckenbach Steamship Company, 
203–4
Ludwig, Daniel K., 178–79, 218–19, 
290, 310
Lukens, Matthias, 116
lumber, 22, 26, 45, 115, 156, 254, 
257
Maas River, 277
Macmillan, Harold, 34
Maersk Line, 346–47, 384, 385
Maine, 268
Malacca- Max, 388–89
Malaysia, 2–3, 9, 281–82, 283, 320, 
358, 368, 388
Malaysian Palm Oil Producers As-
sociation, 343
Manchester, England, 24, 32, 34, 
340
Manhattan, New York, 103, 122; 
and containerization, 126; em-
ployment in, 131; and general 
cargo, 126; and ILA, 127, 159, 
160; international traffic of, 124, 
125; longshoremen in, 158; loss 
of employment in, 129; Pier 42, 
127; plan for ship/rail/truck ter-
minal in, 128
Manila, Philippine Islands, 249–50, 
347
manufacturing, 9, 332, 371; and 
Antwerp, 377; and global supply 
chains, 360–61; and Great Brit-
ain, 278; and growth in interna-
tional trade, 14–15; and high- 
wage vs. low- wage countries, 18; 
and inputs from dispersed 
sources, 392n3; and integrated vs. 
disintegrated production, 356; of 
intermediate goods, 360; job 
losses in, xiv; just- in- time, 14, 
356–57, 358–59; location of, 2, 3, 
4, 18, 21, 133, 263, 392n3; and 
logistics clusters, 378–79; multi-
national, 3–4, 313; networks of, 
4; and New York, 91, 105–6, 
132–33, 386; and organization 
for containerization, 216–17; and 
Pennsylvania Railroad steel con-
tainers, 39; in poorer countries, 
368; in Puerto Rico, 97; and ship-
ping costs, 21–22, 133, 330, 345–
46, 386; and shipping speed, 14; 
vertical integration in, 355–56
Marine Steel Corporation, 170
Marseilles, France, 24, 28, 30–31, 
36
Matson Navigation Company, 
285, 303; adoption of container-
Index • 503
ization by, 79–89; age of con-
tainerships of, 217; board of di-
rectors of, 79, 80, 89; C- 3 
breakbulk ships of, 252; and 
costs, 81–82; and Far East, 198, 
252, 280; and government subsi-
dies, 174, 195, 197; and Hawaii, 
257, 259; and ILWU, 144–45, 
146, 153; and Japan, 252, 253, 
292; and lifting standards, 186, 
187, 190; and military cargo, 
252; and Oakland, 263; and Pa-
cific routes, 384; and railroads, 
227; and San Francisco, 259–60; 
shipments of, 81; and standard-
ization, 170, 173, 174, 178, 182, 
185, 194, 195, 196, 197–99, 
200; and trucking, 216; and ves-
sels for bulk sugar and contain-
ers, 203; and Vietnam War, 245; 
West Coast–Hawaii service of, 
151
Mattel Corp., 355
Maxton, North Carolina, 48
Mayagüez, Puerto Rico, 97
McIntyre, Sidney, 75
McKinsey & Company, 272, 295
McLean, Angus Wilton, 49
McLean, Clara, 59, 78
McLean, James, 55, 59, 66
McLean, Malcolm P., Sr., 49
McLean, Malcom, Jr., 327
McLean, Malcom Purcell, 381, 
405n22; and Alaska Freight 
Lines, 100; ambition of, 50; and 
Atlantic States Motor Lines, 53; 
background of, 48–50; and Bull 
Line, 98, 410n31; character of, 
56; and consolidation vs. compe-
tition, 302; and container dimen-
sions, 198; and costs, xiii, 55–56, 
57, 68, 69, 91–92, 98, 100–101, 
218, 341; death of, 328; and 
debt, 62, 94; and domestic ship 
lines, 56–57; and Elizabeth, 115, 
123; and Europe, 215, 217–18; 
family of, 48–49; and First Col-
ony Farms, 310, 327; and first 
container ships, 64–69; and 
Gleason, 136; and global supply 
chain, 355; and ICC regulation, 
52; and Ideal- X, 68; insight of, 
xi–xii, 10, 70–71, 321, 383; and 
Japan, 250, 252–53; and King, 
114; and leveraged buyouts, 62; 
and lifting standards, 188; and 
Litton Industries, 219; and Lud-
wig, 218–19; management style 
of, xii, 78, 91–93, 99–101; and 
maritime mind- set, 91–92; and 
Matson Navigation Company, 
79, 80; and McLean Trucking 
Company, 49–50; net worth of, 
60; and New York Shipping As-
sociation, 137; and North Atlan-
tic Continental Freight Confer-
ences, 220; and Pacific routes, 
291; and Pan- Atlantic, 76–77, 
78, 86, 92–93; and railroads, 
227–29; and R. J. Reynolds In-
dustries, 290, 302, 307, 308, 
310; and round- the- world ser-
vice, 312, 323–27, 384; and Sea- 
Land, 76–78, 123, 310; and Sea- 
Land sale, 285, 289–91; and 
shipboard cranes, 203; and SL- 
7s, 384; and Tantlinger, 65–66; 
as trucking entrepreneur, 49–51, 
52; truck- ship plan of, 56–58; 
and truck trailer bodies trans-
port, 62–64; and United States 
Lines, 302, 311–12, 323–27; uses 
of containers before, 69–70; and 
Vietnam War, 238–50; and wa-
terfront terminals, 57–58; and 
Waterman, 58–59, 60–62, 69; 
and World War II, 50. See also 
Sea- Land Service
504 • Index
McLean Industries, 138, 324; and 
American- Hawaiian, 218; bank-
ruptcy of, 326; and Bull Line, 91, 
95–96; creation of, 59–60; Equip-
ment Rental Inc. division, 240; 
and federal antitrust authorities, 
96; freight forwarders owned by, 
228; and longshore strikes, 91; 
losses of, 91, 96; and Pennsylva-
nia Railroad, 228; and Puerto 
Rican subsidiary, 98; and rail-
roads, 228–29; and Sea- Land sale, 
290; and Seatrain Lines, 91; and 
shipping to Puerto Rico, 77; and 
SL- 7s, 291; and truck- train- ship 
combination, 228; and United 
States Lines losses, 326; and Viet-
nam War logistical supply, 240; 
and Waterman, 60–61, 219
McLean Trucking Company: auto-
mated terminals of, 54; and Bal-
lantine Beer, 63; and cigarettes, 
53–54; and conveyors, 54; cost 
cutting by, 52–55; debt of, 55; 
and diesel engines, 54; drivers for, 
52, 54, 55–56; as dynamic com-
pany, 55; early success of, 50–51; 
employees of at Pan- Atlantic, 92; 
formation of, 49–50; and fuel 
savings, 54; and Garford Truck-
ing, 53; growth of, 52; and ICC, 
52–54; and management training 
programs, 54–55, 93; and Port of 
New York Authority, 58, 113–14, 
188, 190, 191; purchase and leas-
ing of truck lines by, 52; and rail-
roads, 53–54; rates of, 52–53; 
revenue and assets of, 55; safety- 
consciousness of, 56; sale of, 60; 
size of, 55; success of, 52; and 
veterans, 52; and Winston- Salem, 
290
McNamara, Robert, 234, 236, 237, 
238, 242, 246
Meany, George, 166–67
Mechanization and Modernization 
Agreement. See International 
Longshoremen’s and Warehouse-
men’s Union (ILWU)
Mediterranean Shipping Company, 
384
Melbourne, Australia, 281
merchant marine: and coastwise 
trade, 254; as commandeered by 
government, 47; and container-
ization, 297; government subsi-
dies for, 48, 171–72, 177–78, 182, 
386; post- WWII, 25–26, 47–48, 
217; and regulation, 47, 171, 203, 
385, 386; size of, 27; in Vietnam, 
236, 248; wages for crews of, 48; 
and war- surplus ships, 48. See 
also U.S.- flag ships
Merchant Marine Committee, 76
Mexico, 320
Meyner, Robert, 114
Miami, Florida, 268
Middle East, 322, 326
Military Sea Transportation Service 
(MSTS). See United States Navy
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 257
Missouri Pacific Railroad, 41, 171, 
210
Mitsui Steamship Company, 119, 
253
Mobile, Alabama, 58, 61, 65, 66, 
72, 73, 78, 163, 255, 268
Mokyr, Joel, 363
Møller, A. P., 384
Mombasa, Kenya, 368
Montreal, Canada, 286
Moore- McCormack Lines, 221, 
222, 289, 303, 324, 384
Morrison, Scott, 253
Morse, Wayne, 162
Moscoso, Teodoro, 97
Moses, Robert, 120, 416n27
Motor Carrier Act of 1935, 51
Index • 505
Muller, Fred, 187
Mullman, Morris, 29
Munich, Germany, 221, 225
Nabisco, 91
National Bulk Carriers, 218
National Castings Company, 187
National City Bank, 55, 60–61
National Defense Transportation 
Association, 179–80
National Maritime Union, 109
Nedlloyd, 304, 385
Netherlands, 173, 276–77, 316
Never Steal Anything Small (1959), 
110
Newark, New Jersey, 58, 113–14, 
115, 122, 291, 382; and contain-
erization, 131; and containerport 
development, 266; employment 
in, 129; and Erie and St. Law-
rence Corporation, 204; expan-
sion of, 129; growth of tonnage 
at, 122; and Houston, 68; and 
Ideal- X, 1; and ILA, 137; and 
Pan- Atlantic, 121, 136, 255; and 
Port of New York Authority, 
113, 268; and Sea- Land, 96, 122, 
123, 221, 259, 260–61; size of, 
315; and United States Lines, 
287
Newell, James P., 229
New England, 93, 340
New Jersey, 102, 103, 225; growth 
of, 129; and ILA, 159; and light-
ers, 121; and New York, 115–17; 
and New York Harbor, 103; and 
Port of New York Authority, 58, 
111, 113–15, 116, 126; and Sea- 
Land, 266; share of general cargo 
in, 128; warehouses in, 131; and 
Waterfront Commission of New 
York Harbor, 30; waterfront of, 
107
New Jersey Turnpike, 58, 114
New Orleans, Louisiana, 29, 33, 36, 
91, 137, 267, 268
New York, Port of, 278; cargo han-
dling in, 38; crime in, 30; as lo-
cated in New Jersey, 126; map of, 
106; and Waterfront Commission 
of New York Harbor, 30
New York Central Railroad, 171, 
194, 209; and containers, 227; 
and early containers, 38–39; and 
Flexi- Van, 214, 215, 226; and 
McLean Industries, 228
New York City, New York, 12, 57, 
110, 136, 256; accidents and inju-
ries in, 24; and arrival of contain-
erization, 102; and brokerage and 
freight forwarding, 105; City 
Planning Commission, 118, 120, 
124; and containerization, 123–
24, 125–30; and containerport 
development, 266, 279; container 
tonnage in, 216; cranes in, 75; 
crime in, 37, 109–10; decline of 
docks of, 141–42, 163–64; De-
partment of Marine and Aviation, 
112, 116, 124, 127; disadvan-
tages of, 102–4, 107–11, 118; 
economy of, 2, 102, 105–7, 120, 
130; and Elizabeth, 114, 122, 
123; employment in, 105–7, 108, 
126, 128–29, 130, 131–33; facili-
ties of, 110–11, 112–15, 116–21; 
factory sector of, 132–33; and 
government planning efforts, 385; 
ILA strikes in, 165–66; interna-
tional traffic of, 124; and Japan, 
293; labor militancy in, 400n18; 
and land freight rates, 108–9; and 
lighters, 121; and manufacturing, 
132–33, 386; and marine con-
struction and ship repair, 106; 
and McLean, 57, 98; and munici-
pal ferry system, 105; neighbor-
hoods of, 119; and New Jersey, 
506 • Index
New York City, New York (cont.)
115–17; pier reconstruction in, 
110–11, 116–21, 124; and piggy-
back services, 208, 210; and Port 
of New York Authority, 111, 
116–17, 119–20, 126–27; port re-
development of, 122–23; and 
postwar economy, 107; railroad 
connections in, 102–3; and 
round- the- world service, 321, 
322; and Sea- Land, 91, 122, 123; 
and shipping costs, 340; and 
steamships, 15; and St. Lawrence 
Seaway, 107–8; strikes at, 109; 
subsidies from, 120; tonnage 
losses in, 122, 128; truck delays 
at, 103–4, 109; warehouses in, 
105, 131; and Waterfront Com-
mission, 104, 129, 266; wholesal-
ing in, 131; and World War II, 
107
New York Harbor, 102, 118, 315; 
and containerport development, 
268; container tonnage in 1965–
66, 223; and ILA, 139; and Mc-
Lean Trucking, 113–14; New Jer-
sey side of, 103; and United States 
Lines, 311
New York Shipping Association, 
136, 137, 139, 141, 161–63, 164, 
165, 266
New York Times, 141, 354
New York World Trade Corpora-
tion, 112
New Zealand, 30, 320, 340
Nguyen, Cao Ky, 235
Nha Be, 231
Nike, 379
Nippon Yusen Kaisha (N.Y.K. Line), 
252, 253
nonconference carriers, 342, 343, 
345–47, 353, 458n31
North Atlantic Continental Freight 
Conferences, 220
North Atlantic Pool Agreement, 
304, 334, 343, 457n25
North Shore Line, 40
Norton Lilly & Co., 114, 116
Nutter, Ben, 260–61
Oakland, 243
Oakland, California, 291, 317; and 
American President Lines, 265; 
and double- stack container trains, 
352; and European ship lines, 
264; and federal government, 
261, 262–63; and Japan, 251, 
262, 264; and Matson, 89, 263; 
and Outer Harbor, 262; Port 
Commission, 259, 262; and port 
development, 259, 260–61, 262–
63, 264, 265, 318–19; and Sea- 
Land, 242, 249, 263; and Seattle, 
319; and Vietnam War, 240, 249
Ocean Shipping Company, 41
Ocean Van Lines, 405n25
O’Connor, Vincent, 116, 117, 118, 
119, 120–21, 122, 124, 127–28
O’Dwyer, William, 112
Ogden, E. B., 180–81
oil prices, 15, 19, 305, 306, 307, 
314, 326, 334–35, 338, 355, 380, 
384
Okinawa, Japan, 240, 242, 244, 280
On the Waterfront (1954), 7, 29
Orient Overseas (International) 
Limited, 324, 347
Osaka, Japan, 251, 280
Overseas Containers Ltd., 224, 288, 
303, 385
Pacific Coast Engineering Company 
(PACECO), 86
Pacific Maritime Association, 148, 
150, 151–52, 153
Pacini, Alfred, 36
pallets, 22, 23, 24, 45, 136, 143, 
149, 154, 155, 156, 160, 238
Index • 507
Panama Canal, 235, 325; and 
Colon, 378; and containership 
size, 313–14, 315, 388; and Eliza-
bethport, 261; expansion of, 371–
72; and Ludwig, 218; and Mat-
son, 260; and McLean, 123; and 
minibridge service, 350; and 
round- the- world service, 321
Panamax vessels, 314
Pan- Atlantic Steamship Corpora-
tion, 102, 138; authorized to 
carry containers, 68; and con-
tainer standardization, 173, 174, 
178, 182; and cost analysis, 93; 
and cranes, 67; and first container 
ships, 64–69; and government 
subsidies, 174; and ILA, 136, 137, 
141; and ILWU, 146; and inde-
pendent truck lines, 92; and lift-
ing standards, 185–86; and long-
shore jobs, 137; and longshore 
strikes, 91; and maritime mind- 
set, 91–92; and Matson, 80–81, 
82, 83, 85; McLean Industries 
control of, 58–60; McLean’s new 
management team for, 92–93; and 
McLean Trucking employees, 92; 
and Newark, 78, 121, 136; and 
Puerto Rico, 76–77, 86; pure con-
tainerships of, 72–76; renamed 
Sea- Land Service, 89, 93, 122; 
and roll on–roll off ships, 62; Sea- 
Land Service, 68–69, 76–78, 170; 
and shipboard cranes, 255; T- 2 
tankers of, 66, 73; and Tantlinger, 
65, 66; and trucking companies, 
68; and twist lock, 74, 185–86, 
187–88, 189; water- road rates of, 
211. See also Sea- Land Service
Penn Central Transportation Com-
pany, 348
Pennsylvania, 131, 133
Pennsylvania Railroad, 39, 172–73, 
208–9, 226–27, 228
Persian Gulf, 381, 382
Peru, 368
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 159, 
166, 257, 266, 267–68, 279
Philippine Islands, 236, 241, 243, 
249–50, 283, 294, 381; Subic Bay, 
241, 244, 249–50
Philippines–North America confer-
ence, 347
Pilcher, William, 34
Pinehurst, North Carolina, 310
Piraeus, 368
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 257
Polaris nuclear submarine, 80
Polaroid Corporation, 308
Ponce, Puerto Rico, 96–97
poor countries, 3
Port Angeles, Washington, 254
Port Authority of New York and 
New Jersey, 128, 327
Port Klang, Malaysia, 320
Portland, Oregon, 28, 33–34, 37, 
257, 259, 264–65
Port of London Authority, 273
Port of New York Authority, 58, 
118; and Ballantine Beer con-
tainer experiment, 63; and con-
tainerization, 102, 125–26, 127; 
and containerport development, 
268; and container service, 223–
24; and Elizabeth, 98, 115, 122, 
125, 128, 255, 268, 417n31; 
founding and growth of, 111–12; 
and McLean Trucking, 58, 113–
14, 188, 190, 191; and Newark, 
113, 268; and New Jersey, 58, 
111, 113–15, 116, 126; and New 
York City, 111, 116–17, 119–20, 
126–27; and Sea- Land, 98. See 
also Port Authority of New York 
and New Jersey
ports, 5–9; businesses near, 316, 
340; competition among, 256, 
376–77, 379–80, 382; before 
508 • Index
ports (cont.)
containers, 27; cost of building, 
267; costs at, 12, 27, 331, 338–
39, 364, 397n6; depth of, 230, 
232, 234, 236, 240, 245, 261, 
262, 315, 325, 366, 370–71, 372; 
development for container ship-
ping, 255–56; as distribution cen-
ters, 377–82; and East Coast, 
265–70; economic impact of con-
tainers on, 329; and economies of 
scale, 312; and economy, 272–73; 
efficiency of, 361–62, 367–69, 
380; fees vs. leases at, 333; and 
international supply chain, 361; 
investment in, 256, 318–20; land 
around, 376, 377; land transpor-
tation to and from, 338; local 
economic benefits of, 318; loca-
tion near, 362; location of, 316–
17; as logistics clusters or freight 
villages, 377–78; and manufactur-
ing, 2, 3; and McLean’s funda-
mental insight, 70; and mega-
ships, 370; privately controlled, 
320; river, 378; and round- the- 
world services, 325; and shipping 
costs, 361–62; size of, 315–16, 
376–77; time spent in, 8, 27, 45, 
123, 187, 312, 316, 325, 333, 
341, 370; unused infrastructure 
at, 370; value added by workers 
at, 377; on West Coast, 256–66; 
work performed near, 377; and 
world economy, 368; world’s 
largest, 366–67
Portugal, 17–18
Post- Panamax ships, 315
Powell, Stanley, 198–99
Price, Robert, 126–27
Prior- Palmer, G. E., 197
Propeller Club, 121–22
Prudential Lines, 303
Prussia, 173
Puerto Rico, 204, 302; and Bull 
Line, 130, 178; containers lost in, 
95, 99; economy of, 95, 97; lack 
of warehouse space in, 99; manu-
facturing in, 97; and McLean, 
76–77; and Operation Bootstrap, 
95, 97; and Pan- Atlantic, 76–77, 
86, 255; and Sea- Land, 90, 94–
98, 198, 202; and trade with 
mainland, 95–98; and U.S. do-
mestic ship lines, 95
Puget Sound, 257, 319
Pullman Company, 228
Queen Mary, 290
Qui Nhon, South Vietnam, 231
railroads, 111, 325–26, 383, 
394n11; and American coastal 
shipping competition, 254–55; 
boxcars of, xiv, 70, 207–8, 212, 
226, 229, 350; British, 226; and 
container design, 199–200; and 
container dimensions, 175, 181, 
184, 185; and container diversity, 
171; containerization opposed by, 
xiv, 226–27, 228–29, 350, 383; 
and containerports, 7, 8–9; before 
containers, 22; and deregulation, 
348–51, 352; and doublestacking, 
8, 352; and early containers, xii, 
38–41; and economies of scale, 
225; and economy, 15–16; and 
empty container charges, 227; Eu-
ropean, 225; flatcars of, 207–8, 
209, 349, 350; freight revenues 
of, 205; and ICC, 51–52; and in-
termodal shipment, 13; Japanese, 
251; and Jebel Ali, 381; and just- 
in- time manufacturing, 357; and 
lifting standards, 186, 190; light-
ers of, 103; and logistics clusters, 
378; and long- term contracts, 
351; and McLean, 69, 70, 227–
Index • 509
29, 351–52; and McLean Indus-
tries, 59, 228–29; and McLean 
Trucking, 53–54; and megaships, 
370; and MH- 5 committee, 177; 
and minibridge service, 350–51; 
in New York City, 102–3; and 
New York pier reconstruction, 
117; and New York port, 105, 
118; and Oakland containerport 
development, 262; and piggyback 
services, 206–14, 226, 349–50; 
and port locations, 317; and Port 
of New York Authority, 114; and 
port size, 316; rates of, 39–40, 
108, 211, 212–13, 227, 229, 342, 
349, 351, 352, 371; and refriger-
ated cars, 15–16; regulatory pro-
tection of, 386; and Sea- Land, 
227–28, 350; and Seatrain Lines, 
70; and shipping costs, 12, 212, 
339; and small shipments, 205–6; 
and standardization, 172–74, 
208; and train speeds, 214; and 
Transportation Act of 1958, 212; 
transporting of cars of, 41–42; 
transporting of truck trailers by, 
56–58; and truck competition, 
40–41, 51–52, 205, 348–49, 
403n6; and unions, 349
Ramage, Lawson, 244, 246
retailers, 14, 357–58
revenue bonds, 58
Rhine River, 379
Rhode Island, 57
Ricardo, David, 17–18
Richardson, Paul, 92–93
Richmond, California, 270
R. J. Reynolds Industries: and Mc-
Lean, 290, 302, 308, 310; and 
Sea- Land, 290, 291–92, 302, 303, 
307–8, 321–22
roads and highways, 19, 132, 178, 
205, 256, 316, 370
Roadway Freight, 92
Robeson County, North Carolina, 
48, 50
Rockefeller, David, 119
Roger, Sidney, 169
roll on–roll off ships, 41, 62, 63, 79
Rosenberg, Nathan, 16
Rotterdam, Netherlands, 272, 278, 
286, 291, 295, 316, 377; and An-
twerp, 376; automation at, 373; 
and containerport development, 
279; and container shipping, 
276–77; dockworkers in, 399n12; 
European Container Terminus, 
277; and Felixstowe, 274, 275; 
and Germany, 277; as largest port 
by tonnage, 277; and London, 
277; longshoremen in, 30, 31; 
Maasvlakte 2 terminal at, 373; 
and megaships, 370; and New 
York, 277; and Post- Panamax 
ships, 315; and round- the- world 
service, 322; and Sea- Land, 221, 
274; and United States Lines, 287
rubber, 114, 350–51
Ryan, Joseph, 158
Sager, Karl Heinz, 224, 329
Saigon, South Vietnam, 230, 232–
33, 234, 235, 242, 244, 286; 
Newport development in, 236, 
240
Salalah, Oman, 366
San Diego, California, 36, 319
San Francisco, California, 28, 259; 
and commodity distribution vs. 
factories, 263–64; and container-
port development, 258, 265, 270, 
279; and government planning ef-
forts, 385; ILWU in, 153, 155; 
and Matson, 79, 83, 87, 259–60, 
280; productivity decreases in, 
157; and Sea- Land, 261
San Francisco Bay, 257, 259, 262, 
264, 317
510 • Index
San Juan, Puerto Rico, 96, 98, 255
Santa Rosa, 138
Saudi Arabia, 380, 381, 382
Savannah, Georgia, 158, 269
Sayre, Wallace S., 111
Scandinavia, 221
Scandinavian companies, 288, 303
ScanDutch, 304
Scanservice, 303
Scapa Flow, Orkney Islands, 463n8
S. C. Loveland Co., 58
Scotland, 317, 334
Scott, Norman, 195
Scottish distillers, 275
sea- air service, 91
Sea Containers, 324–25
Seaforth, 273; Royal Seaforth 
Docks, 277
Sea- Land Service, 83, 90, 202, 311, 
385; and ASA, 188; and Boston, 
267; and C- 4 containerships, 245; 
and Caribbean, 124; and Charles-
ton, 269; company culture of, 93; 
competition with, 90–91; and 
conferences, 220–21; and con-
tainer dimensions, 185, 194, 195, 
196, 197–98, 200; containerships 
of, 217, 219–20; containers of, 
170; container tracking by, 99; 
debt of, 217, 286; and Dutch 
shippers, 220; and East Coast, 
265; and economies of scale, 313; 
and Econships, 327; and Eliza-
beth, 123; employees’ recollec-
tions of, 93–94; and Europe, 
217–18, 227–28; and European 
governments and ports, 220–21; 
European service of, 239; and Fe-
lixstowe, 226, 274; finances of, 
100–101; as fined for illegal rates, 
337; government approval of, 94; 
government subsidies for, 195, 
197; growth of, 98–99; and 
Houston, 268; and ILA, 126; and 
imbalanced traffic patterns, 322; 
as independent company, 308; 
and intercoastal service, 218; and 
intracoastal route, 94; and Japan, 
252–53, 280, 322; jumboized ves-
sels of, 94; and lifting standards, 
186, 187–89, 190, 191; and Lit-
ton, 219, 289, 290; and Long 
Beach, 261, 264; and Ludwig, 
218; and McLean, 76–78, 123, 
310; McLean’s sale of, 285, 289–
91; and military goods, 222–23; 
and negative net worth, 96; and 
Newark, 122, 259, 260–61; and 
New Jersey, 266; and Oakland, 
263; office building and terminal 
at Elizabeth, 98–99; and Oki-
nawa, 280; Pan- Atlantic renamed, 
89, 93, 122; performance mea-
sured at, 93; profits of, 289, 303, 
306; and Puerto Rico, 94–98, 
198, 202; and railroads, 227–28, 
350; revenues at, 286; and R. J. 
Reynolds, 290, 291–92, 302, 303, 
307–8, 321–22; and Rotterdam, 
274; and round- the- world service, 
322, 323; and sea- air service, 91; 
and ship depreciation, 410n31; 
and SL- 7, 307–8; and South 
Korea, 294; and Tacoma, 319; 
and trucking, 216; and United 
States Lines, 287, 302, 303, 311; 
and vessels converted into con-
tainerships, 217; and Vietnam 
War, 240–46, 248–49, 292; and 
Virgin Islands, 98; and West 
Coast, 94, 264; and Yokohama, 
280. See also McLean, Malcom 
Purcell; Pan- Atlantic Steamship 
Corporation
Seatrain Lines, 42, 70, 91, 211, 302, 
324
Seattle, Washington, 2, 36, 41, 257, 
259, 317; and commodity distri-
Index • 511
bution vs. factories, 263; and con-
tainerport development, 256, 258, 
262, 264, 265; and double- stack 
container trains, 352; growth of 
foreign trade in, 265; ILWU work-
ers in, 155; Japanese container-
ships in, 265; and local economic 
benefits, 318; and Oakland, 319; 
Port Commission of, 258; and 
port investment costs, 320; and 
Sea- Land, 242, 249; and Tacoma, 
319; and Vietnam War, 249
Senegal, 381
September 2001 attacks, 358
Shanghai, China, 363
Sharjah, 382
Sharpe Army Depot, 238
Shenzhen, China, 5
shipbuilding, 27; after World War II, 
27; cost of, 346; government sub-
sidies for, 171–72, 174, 182, 183, 
195, 197, 198–99, 217, 218; reg-
ulatory protection of, 386; and 
United States Lines, 312
ship lines, xiv, 136, 383; adaptation 
by, 2; American- owned operating 
internationally, 77; and antitrust 
law, 343–44; competition among, 
47–48, 203; and container design, 
200; and container dimensions, 
178, 181, 194; and containerport 
development, 256, 318, 319–20; 
and container ports, 255–56; and 
container shipping, 343–43; and 
early containers and truck trail-
ers, 41; and early experiments 
with containers, xii; and early vs. 
late investment in containership-
ping, 384–85; economic impact of 
containers on, 330; and econo-
mies of scale, 312–13; European 
and Asian, xiv; government World 
War II tankers available to, 62; 
and ILWU, 144–45, 148; and im-
balanced traffic patterns, 322; 
and just- in- time manufacturing, 
357; and leases at ports, 318; and 
lifting standards, 186, 187, 190, 
193; and long- distance trade, 
386; and longshoremen, 35; and 
longshoremen registration, 30; 
long- term contracts with, 352–53; 
and loyalty agreements, 345; and 
McLean, 56–57; and Mechaniza-
tion and Modernization Agree-
ment, 157; and minibridge ser-
vice, 350–51; negotiation of rates 
with shippers, 353–54; and New 
York Port’s decrepit facilities, 
110; nonconference, 342; operat-
ing subsidies for, 195; regulatory 
protection of, 47–48, 203, 386; 
and round- the- world service, 
321–27, 384; shippers’ long- term 
contracts with, 352–53; size aspi-
rations of, 321; as tradition- 
bound, 202–3; and Transporta-
tion Act of 1958, 212; and 
transporting of railroad cars, 41–
42; and worker compensation, 
152, 157. See also conferences 
(cartels); U.S.- flag ships
shippers: and breakbulk freight, 
342; and coastal shipping ser-
vices, 204–5; and conferences, 
337; and container dimensions, 
178; and container shipping, 329, 
343; and cost reductions from 
containers, 331–32, 334, 338; 
and deregulation of transporta-
tion, 348; disparities in rates for, 
345; and labor productivity, 155–
56; and loaded pallets, 155; and 
manufacturing decisions, 330; 
and minibridge service, 350; and 
shipping rates and costs, 342–54; 
and size of containers, 344; and 
total costs, 341
512 • Index
shippers’ councils, 343
Shipping Act of 1984, 352–53
shipping costs, 293, 305, 325, 329, 
330–39, 364, 455n10; in 1950s, 
121; in 1960s, 204, 330–35; in 
1970s, 335–41; after late 1970s, 
341–54, 356; analysis of, 10–13; 
and cargo handling, 13, 363; and 
containerization, 2; and contain-
ers, 354; before containers, 1, 11, 
27, 363; and containerships, 299–
302; and containership size, 369; 
data on, 19, 393n6; and distance, 
361; and early containers, 39–40, 
42–43; and economic geography, 
17–29; and growth in interna-
tional trade, 14–15; and lack of 
freight, 333–34; and landlocked 
countries, 363; and land trans-
port, 339–40; and manufacturers’ 
location, 3, 18; and manufactur-
ing, 386; and ocean freight, 11; 
and oil crisis, 334–35; and poor 
countries, 363; and port effi-
ciency, 361–62; and railroads, 
39–40; and Ricardo, 18; shift to 
flat per- container, 347; and ship-
ping time, 362; and technological 
change, 15–16; and volume, 361; 
and workers, 5; and world econ-
omy, 387. See also cargo 
 handling; conferences (cartels); 
nonconference carriers
Singapore: and containerization, 
295; and containerport develop-
ment, 281–84; East Lagoon, 282, 
283; and Great Britain, 282, 283; 
and Hong Kong, 284; and Japan, 
283, 284; and Port of Singapore 
Authority, 282, 283–84; and Post- 
Panamax ships, 315; and round- 
the- world service, 321, 322
Skagit Steel & Iron Works, 75
Skagway, Alaska, 41
Smathers, George, 211
South Africa, 320–21
South African Marine, 385
South America, 138
Southampton, England, 273
South Asia, 371, 381
South Brooklyn, 32, 130
South Carolina, 5
Southeast Asia, 293
Southern Pacific, 254
Southern Railway, 210, 215
South Korea, 257, 294, 320, 323, 
365
Soviet Union, 306
Spain, 172, 349
speedboxes, 41
spreaders, 6, 67, 85, 179, 187
standardization, 10; of containers, 
170–201, 203, 214, 216; and 
Maritime Administration, 172, 
174–76, 177–79, 180; and over-
capacity problem, 299; and rail-
roads, 172–74, 208; and shipping 
executives, 203. See also contain-
ers, design of; containers, dimen-
sions/size of
Staten Island, New York, 125, 311, 
315, 327
States Marine Lines, 215
steamships, 15, 16, 125, 202
stevedoring companies, 36, 136, 
142, 152–53; in Amsterdam and 
Rotterdam, 399n12; British, 271, 
276; and ILWU, 143–44, 148; 
and longshoremen registration, 
30; number of, 271; and port de-
velopment, 319–20
St. Johnston, Kerry, 224
St. Lawrence Seaway, 107–8
St. Louis, Missouri, 39, 208, 228
Straits of Gibraltar, 321
Straits of Malacca, 388–89
Strick Trailers, 186–87, 191
strikes. See International Longshore-
Index • 513
men’s and Warehousemen’s Union 
(ILWU); International Longshore-
men’s Association (ILA); long-
shoremen; Transport and General 
Workers Union
St. Sure, J. Paul, 148, 150, 151–52, 
153
Suez Canal, 307, 321, 322, 371
sugar, 23, 79–80
Sunset Park, 130–31
Sunshine Biscuit Company, 40
Sydney, Australia, 280
Tacoma, Washington, 257, 319
Taichung, Taiwan, 319
Taiwan, 281, 294, 295, 315, 319, 
324, 347, 355, 358
Tampa, Florida, 255
Tanjung Pelepas, Malaysia, 2–3
tankers, 27, 62–64, 69, 94; T- 2, 65, 
66, 73
Tantlinger, Keith, 80, 186, 405n25; 
and C- 2 container load shift, 76; 
and C- 2 designs, 73–74; and 
container design, 64–66; and 
cranes, 67, 73, 75; and lifting 
standards, 188, 191; and Mc-
Lean, 64–65
Tanzania, 368
tariffs, 11, 298, 341, 344–45, 359, 
360, 362
Teamsters Union, 104, 109, 146, 
168, 208, 267
technology, 15–16, 17, 89–90
televisions, 293, 339, 350
Texas, 268
Thailand, 3, 283, 322, 358, 368
Thatcher, Margaret, 320
Tilbury, England, 273–75, 276, 295, 
315
Tobin, Austin J., 58, 111, 116, 119, 
120, 128
Tokyo, Japan, 251, 280, 318, 361
Toomey, Gerald, 98–99
Toyota Motor Company, 14, 
356–57
Tozzoli, Guy F., 120
Trailer Train Company, 209, 211, 
214, 226, 229
Trailmobile, 85, 86
tramp ships, 335–36, 345
transit sheds, 22, 26, 27, 104. See 
also warehouses
Transportainer, 41
Transport and General Workers 
Union, 271, 273–74, 275, 276
Transportation Act of 1958, 211–12
Trans World Airlines, 167
TRIO, 304
Trotter, Eddie, 34
truckers, 28, 46, 225, 383
trucking: and Boston, 267; and 
cargo handling, 11; and competi-
tion, 51–52, 205, 254–55; and 
container design, 200; and con-
tainer dimensions, 175; and con-
tainers, 349; and container trans-
port, 131; deregulation of, 
347–51; and domestic ship lines, 
56–57; and empty containers, 
349; and highway congestion, 
56–57; ICC regulation of, 51–52; 
and Matson, 216; and McLean, 
49–51, 52, 56–58, 62–64, 69; and 
McLean Industries, 240; and New 
York port, 103–4, 105; and rail-
roads, 40–41, 51–52, 205; regula-
tory protection of, 386; and Sea- 
Land, 216; and shipping costs, 
12; and Transportation Act of 
1958, 212; and unions, 349; and 
urban development, 16
trucking associations, 197
trucking companies: and container 
dimensions, 194; and container 
standardization, 174; indepen-
dent, 92; intercity, 205; and just- 
in- time manufacturing, 357; and 
514 • Index
trucking companies (cont.)
MH- 5 committee, 177; and Pan- 
Atlantic, 68; and railroads, 
403n6; and rates, 342, 349; and 
Trailer Train Company, 209. See 
also McLean Trucking Company
trucks, 27, 209–10, 256; and C- 2 
freighter containers, 74; and 
coastal shipping, 254–55; and 
container design, 199; and con-
tainer dimensions, 178, 181, 198; 
and containerports, 7, 8; before 
containers, 22; containers fit in-
side, 42; and costs per mile, 212; 
and early containers, 38; and 
Flexi- Van, 209–10; and intermo-
dal shipment, 13; in Japan, 251; 
and land freight rates, 108–9; 
long-  vs. short- distance transpor-
tation by, 40; and Matson, 80, 
81–82; and McLean, 70; and 
McLean Industries, 228; and 
megaships, 370; and New York 
Port, 108–9, 110, 118; and pig-
gyback services, 206–14, 226, 
349–50; and Port of New York 
Authority, 114; in post–world 
War II period, 47; and public 
loaders, 104, 109, 110; and rail-
road competition, 348–49; reve-
nues of, 205; and shipping costs, 
339, 340; and ship transport, 56–
58, 62–64; size of, 205; and 
small shipments, 205–6; speeds 
of, 205; and stacking, 63; and 
Tantlinger, 64; trailers of, 56–58, 
62–64, 209–10, 214, 216, 349–
50; and Vietnam War, 240, 242, 
243, 248
TrucTrains, 208–9
Tung, C. Y., 347
twist lock, 74, 185–86, 187–88, 
189, 193
Union Pacific Railroad, 254
unions, 4, 203, 349; labor, 10, 30, 
35, 36, 37, 115, 329, 348, 372–
73, 383
United Arab Emirates, 381
United Auto Workers, 167
United Cargo Corporation, 434n5
United Mine Workers, 167
United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development (UNC-
TAD), 331, 343
United Shipping Company, 41
United States: and Asia trade, 346; 
and Canadian coastal ship lines, 
41; and China, 364; dock unions 
in, 36; economy of, 13, 47, 51; 
exports of, 11; industrial produc-
tion in, 305; and Japan, 250, 280, 
292; and South Korea, 294; and 
U.K. trade, 299; and Vietnam 
War, 230–53
United States, 291, 311
United States Air Force, 233
United States Army, 215, 233, 237; 
and early container use, 170; First 
Logistical Command, 234, 241, 
242
United States Army Materiel Com-
mand, 233, 241
United States Coast Guard, 66, 67, 
68
United States Department of De-
fense, 239, 248
United States Department of Labor, 
164, 166
United States Economic Develop-
ment Administration, 262–63
United States Federal Maritime 
Board, 171, 179, 183
United States Federal Maritime 
Commission, 275, 350
United States Freight Company, 
179, 214–15
Index • 515
United States Labor Department, 
163
United States Lines, 130, 215, 287–
88, 324; and American Lancer, 
290, 291; bankruptcy of, 326–27, 
328; and conferences, 220; and 
containership efficiencies, 222; 
and container terminal on Staten 
Island, 327; and economies of 
scale, 313; and European govern-
ments and ports, 220–21; and 
government construction subsi-
dies, 323–24; and government op-
erating subsidies, 311; and Japan, 
293; and McLean, 302, 311–12, 
323–27; profits of, 289, 306; and 
round- the- world service, 323–27; 
and Sea- Land, 302, 303; terminal 
on Staten Island, 311, 315; and 
Tilbury, 275
United States Marine Corps, 237
United States Maritime Administra-
tion, 171–72; and cost analysis, 
341; and operating subsidies to 
U.S. ship lines, 195; and standard-
ization, 172, 174–76, 177–79, 
180, 190, 196, 198; and United 
States Lines, 288, 311
United States military, 44, 378; 
cargo shipped to Europe, 247; 
and Conex boxes, 41; freight of, 
77, 179, 180, 203, 222–23, 236, 
243, 250, 353, 434n2; Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, 233, 239, 245; 
and size of containers, 344
United States Navy, 25, 172, 222–
23, 231, 235, 237, 241, 308; Mili-
tary Sea Transportation Service 
(MSTS), 231, 232, 236, 237, 239, 
240–41, 242, 244, 245, 246, 249
United States Supreme Court, 50
U.S.- flag ships, 338; American crews 
of, 77; containerships in fleet of, 
296–97; and government freight, 
171, 195; government subsidies 
for, 48, 171, 172; inefficiencies of, 
98; and Jones Act, 171; and mili-
tary contracts, 248; and military 
freight, 77, 203, 353, 434n2; and 
protected markets and heavy reg-
ulation, xiv; and Puerto Rico, 95; 
and Sea- Land, 222; and U.S. gov-
ernment shipments, 77. See also 
merchant marine
Vancouver, British Columbia, 41
Venezuela, 378
Venlo, Netherlands, 379
veterans, 52
Victory Ships, 25–26, 27
Vietnam War, 10, 229, 230–53; and 
cargo theft, 232; and container-
ization, 239–50; corruption in, 
235; and logistics, 230–50; and 
military buildup, 230; and pallet-
ization, 238; and port facilities, 
230, 231–32, 234, 236, 240, 241, 
242, 244; and push vs. pull sup-
ply system, 233; and Sea- Land, 
286, 292; and theft, 247; and 
unitized packaging, 238; and 
West Coast container service, 264
Virginia, 317
Virgin Islands, 98
Wagner, Robert F., 112, 115, 117, 
118, 119, 124, 164
Wal- Mart Stores, 358
Walter Kidde & Co., 289, 311
warehouses, 93; and container 
transport, 131; and docks, 21; in 
New York City, 105, 131; pier-
side, 14; workers in, 28. See also 
transit sheds
Warrior, 43–46, 362
Washington, D.C., 210
516 • Index
Waterfront Commission of New 
York Harbor, 30, 104, 110, 129, 
266, 420n2
Waterman Steamship Corporation, 
43, 58–59, 60–62, 69, 91, 301; 
culture of, 77–78; fleet of, 72; 
headquarters of, 77–78; and Lit-
ton, 219; and McLean Industries, 
219; Newark terminal of, 113; 
shipyard in Mobile, 72
Weldon, Foster, 80, 81–83, 85, 87, 
88
Wellington, New Zealand, 340
West Coast, 38, 216, 261, 322; and 
containerport development, 256–
66; and longshore unions, 36; and 
Matson, 80, 252; and Sea- Land, 
94, 96, 123, 253; and volume of 
international trade, 266
Westmoreland, William, 234, 236, 
241
Whirlpool Corporation, 227
whiskey, 37, 222, 334
Whitehorse, 41–42
White Pass and Yukon Route Rail-
road, 41
White Star steamers, 278
wholesaling, xiv, 14, 105, 131, 330
Wilhelmshaven, Germany, 371
winches, 22, 23, 43, 67, 88, 157, 
185. See also cranes
Windsor Terrace, 130–31
Works Progress Administration, 50
World Bank, 283, 318, 354, 363, 
368
world economy, 2, 10, 15, 304, 305, 
306, 386. See also globalization
World Trade Center, 125, 126, 159, 
358
World Trade Organization, 364
World War I, 38
World War II, 24, 205, 217, 258; 
and economy, 107; labor unrest 
following, 52; and New York 
port, 105; period after, 4, 30, 32, 
79, 107; and Port of New York, 
107; and ship construction, 27
Wriston, Walter, 55, 60–61
Xerox Corporation, 308
Yangshan Deep- Water Port, 363
Yokohama, Japan, 251, 265, 286, 
291; and containerport develop-
ment, 280–81; and Long Beach 
and Oakland, 347; and port size, 
315; and round- the- world service, 
321; and Sea- Land, 253, 280, 292
Yom Kippur War, 334
Younger, Kenneth, 92
Zim Line, 322–23